
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



•ROBERT f 

•CHATIBERS 



i 



GIFT OF 

Mr.Leupp 




THE MYSTEIiY 
OF CHOICE 



BY 

ROBERT W. CHAMBERS 

AUTHOR OP THB KING IN YBLLOW, THB KBD RBPUBUC, 
A KING AND A FBW DUKBS, THB MAKBR OP MOONS, BTC 




NEW YORK 
APPLETON AND COMPANY 
1897 



r • . ' • 



OoFnaoHT, 1897, 
Bt ROBERT W. CHAMBEBa 







955 

DEDICATION. 



There %8 a maid, demure as she is wise^ 
With all of April in her toinsome eyes, 
And to my tales she listens pensively. 
With slender fingers clasped about her knee. 
Watching tlie sparroufs on the halcony. 

Shy eyes that, lifted up to me. 
Free all my heart of vanity ; 
Clear eyes, that speak all silently. 
Sweet as the silence of a nwrmery — 
Read, for I write my rede for you alone. 
Here where the city*s mighty monotone 
Deepens the silence to a symphony — 
Silence of Saints, and Seers, and Sorcery, 

Arms and the Man I A noble theme, I ween / 
Alas I I can not sing of these, Eileen — 
Only of maids and men and meadow-grass. 
Of sea and fields and woodlands, where I pass; 
Nothing hut these I know, Eileen, alas I 

Clear eyes that, lifted up to me. 
Free all my soul from vanity; 
Gray eyes, that speak all wistfully— 
Nothing hut these I know, alas ! 

R. w. a 

April, 1896. 



500G73 



INTRODUCTION. 



L 

Where two favr paths, deep flowered 

And leaf-embowered, 
Creep East and West aeroae a World concealed. 
Which ehaU he take who journey a far afield f 

n. 
Canst thou then aay, "I go,*' 

Or *'I forego'* f 
What turns thee East or West, as thiatles blow f 
Is fair more fair than fair — and doat thou know f 

in. 
Turn to the West, unblessed 

And uncaresaed ; 
Turn to the East, and, seated at the Feast 
Thou shall find Life, or Death from Life released, 

IV, 
And thou who lovest best 

A maid dark-tressed, 
Andpacsest others by with careless eye. 
Canst thou tell why thou choosest f Tell, then; why f 

I ""■ 

So w^m thy kisa ia given 

\ Or half-forgiven. 

Why Should ahe tremble, with her face flame-hot. 
Or lauph and whisper, "Love, I tremble not " f 

{ tU 



VIU 



THE MYSTERY OP CHOICB. 



vi. 
Or when thy hand fMvy catch 

A half-draton kUch, 
Whai draws thee from the door, to turn and pose 
Through streets unknown^ dim, still, and choked with 
grass f 

VU, 
What I Canst thou not foresee 

The Mystery f 
Heed I For a Voice commands thy every deed ! 
And it hath sounded. And tJ^ou needs must heed / 



R. W. C. 



me. 



CONTENTS. 



PAOB 

The Purple Emperor 1 

POMPK PUNiBRE .39 

The Messenger 47 

The White Shadow IO9 

Passeur 175 

A Matter op Interest 213 

Envoi , 283 

ix 



THE PURPLE EMPEROR. 



THE PUEPLE EMPEROR. 

Un souvenir heureux est peut-^tre, sur terre, 
Plus vrai que le bonheur. 

A. DE MUSSET. 



The Ptirple Emperor watched me in silence. 
I cast again^ spinning out six feet more of water- 
proof silk, and, as the line hissed through the air 
far across the pool, I saw my three flies fall on 
the water like drifting thistledown. The Pur- 
ple Emperor sneered. 

" You see,*' he said, " I am right. There is 
not a trout in Brittany that will rise to a tailed 

fly/' 

" They do in America,*' I replied. 

** Zut! for America! '* observed the Purple 
Emperor. 

** And trout take a tailed fly in England,'* I 
insisted sharply. 

** Now do I care what things or people do in 
England? ** demanded the Purple Emperor. 

'* You don't care for anything except your- 
self and your wriggling caterpillars," I said, 
more annoyed than I had yet been. 
8 



'4V-: : -^B jitY^tEEY OF CHOICE. 

The Purple Emperor sniffed. His broad, 
hairless, sunburnt features bore that obstinate 
expression which always irritated me. Perhaps 
the manner in which he wore his hat intensified 
the irritation, for the flapping brim rested on 
both ears, and the two little velvet ribbons which 
hung from the silver buckle in front wiggled 
and fluttered with every trivial breeze. His 
cunning eyes and sharp-pointed nose were out 
of all keeping with his fat red face. When he 
met my eye, he chuckled. 

" I know more about insects than any man in 
Morbihan— or Finist^re either, for that matter,** 
he said. 
. " The Eed Admiral knows as much as you 
do,** I retorted. 

^^ He doesn*t,** replied the Purple Emperor 
angrily. 

*^ And his collection of butterflies is twice as 
large as yours,** I added, moving down the 
stream to a spot directly opposite him. 

" It is, is it? ** sneered the Purple Emperor. 
'^ Well, let me tell you. Monsieur Barrel, in all 
his collection he hasn*t a specimen, a single 
specimen, of that magnificent butterfly, Apa- 
tura Iris, commonly known as the * Purple 
Emperor.* ** 

"Everybody in Brittany knows that,** I 
said, casting across the sparkling water; "but 
just because you happen to be the only man 
who ever captured a ^Purple Emperor* in 



THE PUKPLE EMPEROK. 6 

Morbihan^ it doesn't follow that you are an 
authority on sea-trout flies. Why do you 
say that a Breton sea-trout won't touch a 
tailed fly?" 

" It's so," he replied. 

" Why? There are plenty of May-flies about 
the stream." 

" Let 'em flyl " snarled the Purple Emperor, 
*' you won't see a trout touch 'em." 

My arm was aching, but I grasped my split 
bamboo more firmly, and, half turning, waded 
out into the stream and began to whip the rip- 
ples at the head of the pool. A great green 
dragon-fly came drifting by on the summer 
breeze and hung a moment above the pool, glit- 
tering like an emerald. 

" There's a chancel Where is your butterfly 
net? " I called across the stream. 

"What for? That dragon-fly? I've got 
dozens — ^Anax Junius, Drury, characteristic, 
anal angle of posterior wings, in male, round; 
thorax marked with ^" 

" That will do," I said flercely. " Can't I 
point out an insect in the air without this burst 
of erudition? Can you tell me, in simple every- 
day French, what tMs little fly is — ^this one, flit- 
ting over the eel grass here beside me? See, it 
has fallen on the water." 

"Huh!" sneered the Purple Emperor, 
'^ that's a Linnobia annidus." 

" What's that? " I demanded. 



6 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

Before he could answer there came a heavy 
splash in the pool, and the fly disappeared. 

" He! he! he! ^' tittered the Purple Emperor. 
'^ Didn^t I tell you the fish knew their business? 
That was a sea-trout. I hope you don't get 
him.'' 

He gathered up his butterfly net, collecting 
box, chloroform bottle, and cyanide jar. Then 
he rose, swung the box over his shoulder, 
stuffed the poison bottles into the pockets of 
his silver-buttoned velvet coat, and lighted his 
pipe. This latter operation was a demoralizing 
spectacle, for the Purple Emperor, like all Bre- 
ton peasants, smoked one of those microscopical 
Breton pipes which requires ten minutes to 
find, ten minutes to fill, ten minutes to light, 
and ten seconds to finish. With true Breton 
stolidity he went through this solemn rite, blew 
three puffs of smoke into the air, scratched his 
pointed nose reflectively, and waddled away, 
calling back an ironical " Au revoir, and bad 
luck to all Yankees! " 

I watched him out of sight, thinking sadly 
of the young girl whose life he made a hell 
upon earth — ^Lys Trevec, his niece. She never 
admitted it, but we all knew what the black- 
and-blue marks meant on her soft, round arm, 
and it made me sick to see the look of fear 
come into her eyes when the Purple Emperor 
waddled into the caf6 of the Groix Inn. 

It was commonly said that he half-starved 



THE PURPLE EMPEROR. Y 

her. This she denied. Marie Joseph and Tine 
Leloeard had seen him strike her the day after 
the Pardon of the Birds because she had liber- 
ated three bullfinches which he had limed the 
day before. I asked Lys if this were true, and 
she refused to speak to me for the rest of the 
week. There was nothing to do about it. If 
the Purple Emperor had not been avaricious, I 
should never have seen Lys at all, but he could 
not resist the thirty francs a week which I of- 
fered him; and Lys posed for me all day long, 
happy as a linnet in a pink thorn hedge. Never- 
theless, the Purple Emperor hated me, and con- 
stantly threatened to send Lys back to her dreary 
flax-spinning. He was suspicious, too, and when 
he had gulped down the single glass of cider 
which proves fatal to the sobriety of most Bre- 
tons, he would pound the long, discoloured 
oaken table and roar curses on me, on Yves Ter- 
rec, and on the Bed Admiral. We were the 
three objects in the world which he most hated: 
me, because I was a foreigner, and didn^t care 
a rap for him and his butterflies; and the Bed 
Admiral, because he was a rival entomologist. 

He had other reasons for hating Terrec. 

The Bed Admiral, a little wizened wretch, 
with a badly adjusted glass eye and a passion for 
brandy, took his name from a butterfly which 
predominated in his collection. This butter- 
fly, commonly known to amateurs as the " Bed 
Admiral,^^ and to entomologists as Vanessa Ata- 



8 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

lanta^ had been the occasion of scandal among 
the entomologists of France and Brittany. For 
the Sed Admiral had taken one of these common 
insects, dyed it a brilliant yellow by the aid of 
chemicals, and palmed it off on a credulous col- 
lector as a South African species, absolutely 
unique. The fifty francs which he gained by 
this rascality were, however, absorbed in a suit 
for damages brought by the outraged amateur a 
month later; and when he had sat in the Quim- 
perl6 jail for a month, he reappeared in the 
little village of St. Gildas soured, thirsty, and 
burning for revenge. Of course we named him 
the Bed Admiral, and he accepted the name 
with suppressed fury. 

The Purple Emperor, on the other hand, had 
gained his imperial title legitimately, for it was 
an undisputed fact that the only specimen of that 
beautiful butterfly, Apatura Iris, or the Purple 
Emperor, as it is called by amateurs — ^the only 
specimen that had ever been taken in Finistdre 
or in Morbihan — ^was captured and brought 
home alive by Joseph Marie Qloanec, ever after- 
ward to be known as the Purple Emperor. 

When the capture of this rare butterfly be- 
came known the Red Admiral nearly went 
crazy. Every day for a week he trotted over 
to the Groix Inn, where the Purple Emperor 
lived with his niece, and brought his microscope 
to bear on the rare newly captured butterfly, in 
hopes of detecting a fraud. But this specimen 



THE PURPLE EMPEROR. 9 

was genuine, and he leered through his micro- 
scope in vain. 

" No chemicals there. Admiral/' grinned the 
Purple Emperor; and the Eed Admiral chat- 
tered with rage. 

To the scientific world of Brittany and 
France the capture of an Apatura Iris in Morbi- 
han was of great importance. The Museum of 
Quimper offered to purchase the butterfly, but 
the Purple Emperor, though a hoarder of gold, 
was a monomaniac on butterflies, and he jeered 
at the Curator of the Museum. From all parts 
of Brittany and France letters of inquiry and 
congratulation poured in upon him. The 
French Academy of Sciences awarded him a 
prize, and the Paris Entomological Society made 
him an honorary member. Being a Breton 
peasant, and a more than commonly pig-headed 
one at that, these honours did not disturb his 
equanimity; but when the little hamlet of St. 
Gildas elected him mayor, and, as is the custom 
in Brittany under such circumstances, he left 
his thatched house to take up an official life in 
the little Groix Inn, his head became completely 
turned. To be mayor in a village of nearly one 
hundred and fifty people! It was an empire! 
So he became unbearable, drinking himself vi- 
ciouslydrunk every night of his life, maltreating 
his niece, Lys Trevec, like the barbarous old 
wretch that he was, and driving the Eed Ad- 
miral nearly frantic with his eternal harping on 



10 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

the capture of Apatura Iris. Of course he re- 
fused to tell where he had caught the butterfly. 
The Bed Admiral stalked his footsteps^ but 
in vain. 

"He! he! he!*' nagged the Purple Emper- 
or, cuddling his chin over a glass of cider; 
"I saw you sneaking about the St. Gildas 
spinny yesterday morning. So you think you 
can find another Apatura Iris by running after 
me? It won't do, Admiral, it won't do, d'ye 
see?" 

The Eed Admiral turned yellow with'morti- 
fication and envy, but the next day he actually 
took to his bed, for the Purple Emperor had 
brought home not a butterfly but a live chrysa- 
lis, which, if successfully hatched, would be- 
come a perfect specimen of the invaluable Apa- 
tura Iris. This was the last straw. The Bed 
Admiral shut himself up in his little stone cot- 
tage, and for weeks now he had been invisible 
to everybody except 'Fine Lelocard who carried 
him a loaf of bread and a mullet or langouste 
every morning. 

Thewithdrawal of the Red Admiral from the 
society of St. Gildas excited first the derision 
and finally the suspicion of the Purple Emperor. 
What deviltry could he be hatching? Was he 
experimenting with chemicals again, or was he 
engaged in some deeper plot, the object of which 
was to discredit the Purple Emperor? Roux, 
the postman, who carried the mail on foot once 



THE PUBPLE EMPEROB. H 

a day from Bannalec^ a distance of fifteen miles 
each way, had brought several suspicious letters, 
bearing English stamps, to the Bed Admiral, 
and the next day the Admiral had been observed 
at his window grinning up into the sky and 
rubbing his hands together. A night or two 
after this apparition the postman left two pack- 
ages at the Groix Inn for a moment while heran 
across the way to drink a glass of cider with me. 
The Purple Emperor, who was roaming about 
the caf 6, snooping into everything that did not 
concern him, came upon the packages and ex- 
amined the postmarks and addresses. One of 
the packages was square and heavy, and f 6lt like 
a book. The other was also square, but very 
light, and felt like a pasteboard box. They were 
both addressed to the Bed Admiral, and they 
bore English stamps. 

When Boux, the postman, came back, the 
Purple Emperor tried to pimip him, but the poor 
little postman knew nothing about the contents 
of the packages, and after he had taken them 
around the comer to the cottage of the Bed Ad- 
miral the Purple Emperor ordered a glass of 
cider, and deliberately fuddled himself until 
Lys came in and tearfully supported him to his 
room. Here he became so abusive and brutal 
that Lys called to me, and I went and settled the 
trouble without wasting any words. This also 
the Purple Emperor remembered, and waited 
his chance to get even with me. 



12 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

That had happened a week ago, and until 
to-day he had not deigned to speak to me. 

Lys had posed for me all the week, and to- 
day being Saturday, and I lazy, we had decided 
to take a little relaxation, she to visit and gossip 
with her little black-eyed friend Yvette in the 
neighbouring hamlet of St. Julien, and I to 
try the appetites of the Breton trout with the 
contents of my American fly book. 

I had thrashed the stream very conscien- 
tiously for three hours, but not a trout had risen 
to my cast, and I was piqued. I had begun to 
believe that therewereno trout in the St. Gildas 
stream, and woidd probably have given up had 
I not seen the sea trout snap the little fly which 
the Purple Emperor had named so scientific- 
ally. That set me thinking. Probably the 
Purple Emperor was right, for he certainly was 
an expert in everything that crawled and wrig- 
gled in Brittany. So I matched, from my 
American fly book, the fly that the sea trout 
had snapped up, and withdrawing the cast of 
three, knotted a new leader to the silk and 
slipped a fly on the loop. It was a queer fly. It 
was one of those unnameable experiments which 
fascinate anglers in sporting stores and which 
generally prove utterly useless. Moreover, it 
was a tailed fly, but of course I easily remedied 
that with a stroke of my penknife. Then I was 
all ready, and I stepped out into the hurrying 
rapids and cast straight as an arrow to the spot 



THE PURPLE EMPEROR. 13 

where the sea trout had risen. Lightly as a 
plume the fly settled on the bosom of the pool; 
then came a startling splash, a gleam of silver, 
and the line tightened from the vibrating rod- 
tip to the shrieking reel. Almost instantly I 
checked the fish, and as he floundered for a mo- 
ment, making the water boil along his glittering 
sides, I sprang to the bank again, for I saw that 
the fish was a heavy one and I should prebably 
be in for a long run down the stream. The five- 
ounce rod swept in a splendid circle, quivering 
under the strain. "Oh, for a gaff-hook! ^^ I 
cried aloud, for I was now firmly convinced that 
I had a salmon to deal with, and no sea trout 
at all. 

Then as I stood, bringing every ounce to 
bear on the sulking fish, a lithe, slender girl 
came hurriedly along the opposite bank calling 
out to me by name. 

" Why, Lys! ^* I said, glancing up for a sec- 
ond, "I thought you were at St. Julien with 
Yvette.'^ 

"Yvette has gone to Bannelec. I went 
home and found an awful fight going on at the 
Groix Inn, and I was so frightened that I came 
to tell you.'* 

The fish dashed off at that moment, carry- 
ing all the line my reel held, and I was compelled 
to follow him at a jump. Lys, active and grace- 
ful as a young deer, in spite of her Pont-Aven 
sabots, followed along the opposite bank until 



14 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

the fish settled in a deep pool, shook the line sav- 
agely once or twice, and then relapsed into the 
sulks. 

"Kght at the Groix Inn?^' I called across 
the water. "What fight?'' 

" Not exactly fight/' quavered Lys, " but the 
Bed Admiral has come out of his house at last, 
and he and my uncle are drinking together and 
disputing about butterflies. I never saw my 
uncle so angry, and the Red Admiral is sneering 
and grinning. Oh, it is almost wicked to see 
such a face!" 

" But Lys," I said, scarcely able to repress 
a smile, " your uncle and the Red Admiral are 
always quarrelling and drinking." 

" I know— oh, dear mel — ^but this is differ- 
ent. Monsieur Barrel. The Bed Admiral has 
grown old and fierce since he shut himself up 
three weeks ago, and — oh, dear! I never saw 
such a look in my uncle's eyes before. He 
seemed insane with fury. His eyes — ^I can't 
speak of it — ^and then Terrec came in." 

" Oh," I said more gravely, " that was un- 
fortunate. What did the Red Admiral say to 
his son?" 

Lys sat down on a rock among the ferns, 
and gave me a mutinous glance from her blue 



Yves Terrec, loafer, poacher, and son of Louis 
Jean Terrec, otherwise the Red Admiral, had 
been kicked out by his father, and had also been 



THE PUEPLE EMPEROK. 15 

forbidden the village by the Purple Emperor, 
in his majestic capacity of mayor. Twice the 
young ruffian had returned: once to rifle the 
bedroom of the Purple Emperor — an unsuccess- 
ful enterprise — ^and another time to rob his own 
father. He succeeded in the latter attempt, but 
was never caught, although he was frequently 
seen roving about the forests and moors with his 
gun. He openly menaced the Purple Emperor; 
vowed that he would marry Lys in spite of all 
the gendarmes in Quimperl6; and these same 
gendarmes he led many a long chase through 
brier-filled swamps and over miles of yellow 
gorse. 

What he did to the Purple Emperor — ^what 
he intended to do — disquieted me but little; 
but I worried over his threat concerning Lys. 
During the last three months this had bothered 
me a great deal; for when Lys came to St. Gil- 
das from the convent the first thing she cap- 
tured was my heart. For a long time I had re- 
fused to believe that any tie of blood linked this 
dainty blue-eyed creature with the Purple Em- 
peror. Although she dressed in the velvet- 
laced bodice and blue petticoat of Rnist^re, and 
wore the bewitching white coiffe of St. Gildas, 
it seemed like a pretty masquerade. To me she 
was as sweet and as gently bred as many a 
maiden of the noble Faubourg who danced with 
her cousins at a Louis XV f Ste champStre. So 
when Lys said that Yves Terrec had returned 






16 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

openly to St. Gildas, I felt that I had better be 
there also. 

"What did Terrec say, Lys?'' I asked, 
watching the line vibrating above the placid 
pool. 

The wild rose colour crept into her cheeks. 
"Oh," she answered, with a little toss of her 
chin, " you know what he always says." 

" That he will carry you away? " 

"Yes." 

" In spite of the Purple Emperor, the Red 
Admiral, and the gendarmes? " 

"Yes." 

" And what do you say, Lys? " 

"I? Oh, nothing." 

" Then let me say it for you." 

Lys looked at her delicate pointed sabots, 
the sabots from Pont-Aven, made to order. 
They fitted her little foot. They were her only 
luxury. 

" Will you let me answer for you, Lys? " I 
asked. 

"You, Monsieur Barrel?" 

"Yes. Will you let me give him his an- 
swer? " 

" Mon Dieu, why should you concern your- 
self. Monsieur Barrel? " 

The fish lay very quiet, but the rod in my 
hand trembled. 

" Because I love you, Lys." 

The wild rose colour in her cheeks deepened; 



THE PURPLE EMPEROR. 17 

she gave a gentle gasp, then hid her curly head 
in her hands. 

** I love you, Lys.'' 

" Do you know what you say? '* she stam- 
mered. 

" Yes, I love you.** 

She raised her sweet face and looked at me 
across the pool. 

" I love you,** she said, while the tears stood 
like stars in her eyes. " Shall I come over the 
brook to you? ** 

n. 

That night Yves Terrec left the village of St. 
Oildas vowingvengeance against his father, who 
refused him shelter. 

I can see him now, standing in the road, his 
bare legs rising like pillars of bronze from his 
straw-stuffed sabots, his short velvet jacket torn 
and soiled by exposure and dissipation, and his 
eyes, fierce, roving, bloodshot — while the Eed 
Admiral squeaked curses on him, and hobbled 
away into his little stone cottage. 

" I will not forget you! ** cried Yves Terrec, 
and stretched out his hand toward his father 
with a terrible gesture. Then he whipped his 
gun to his cheek and took a short step forward, 
but I caught him by the throat before he could 
fire, and a second later we were rolling in the 
dust of the Bannalec road. I had to hit him a 
heavy blow behind the ear before he would let 



18 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

go, and then^ rising and shaking myself^ I dashed 
his muzzle-loading fowling piece to bits against 
a wall, and threw his knife into the river. The 
Purple Emperor was looking on with a queer 
light in his eyes. It was plain that he was sorry 
Terrec had not choked me to death. 

" He would have killed his father/' I said, as 
I passed him, going toward the Groix Inn. 

"That's his business,'' snarled the Purple 
Emperor. There was a deadly light in his eyes. 
For a moment I thought he was going to attack 
me; but he was merely viciously drunk, so I 
shoved him out of my way and went to bed, tired 
and disgusted. 

The worst of it was I couldn't sleep, for I 
feared that the Purple Emperor might begin to 
abuse Lys. I lay restlessly tossing among the 
sheets until I coidd stay there no longer. I did 
not dress entirely; I merely slipped on a pair of 
chaussons and sabots, a pair of knickerbockers, 
a jersey, and a cap. Then, loosely tying a hand- 
kerchief about my throat, I went down the 
worm-eaten stairs and out into the moonlit road. 
There was a candle flaring in the Purple Em- 
peror's window, but I could not see him. 

"He's probably dead drunk," I thought, 
and looked up at the window where, three years 
before, I had first seen Lys. 

" Asleep, thank Heaven! " I muttered, and 
wandered out along the road. Passing the 
small cottage of the Bed Adnoiral, I saw that it 



THE PUBPLE EMPEBOB. 19 

was dark, but the door was open. I stepped in- 
side the hedge to shut it, thinking, in case Yves 
Terrec should be rovfng about, his father would 
lose whatever he had left. 

Then, after fastening the door with a stone, 
I wandered on through the dazzling Breton 
moonlight. A nightingale was singing in a 
willow swamp below, and from the edge of the 
mere, among the tall swamp grasses, myriads of 
frogs chanted a bass chorus. 

When I returned, the eastern sky was begin- 
ning to lighten, and across the meadows on the 
clifEs, outlined against the paling horizon, I saw 
a seaweed gatherer going to his work among 
the curling breakers on the coast. His long 
rake was balanced on his shoulder, and the sea 
wind carried his song across the meadows to me: 

St-Gildas! 
StGildas! 
Pray for us, 
Shelter us, 
Us who toil in the sea. 

Passing the shrine at the entrance of the vil- 
lage, I took oflf my cap and knelt in prayer to 
Our Lady of Faouet; and if I neglected myself 
in that prayer, surely I believed Our Lady of 
Faouet would be kinder to Lys. It is said that 
the shrine casts white shadows. I looked, but 
saw only the moonlight. Then very peace- 
fully I went to bed again, and was only awak- 



20 THE MYSTEEY OF CHOICE. 

ened by the clank of sabres and the trample of 
horses in the road below my window. 

" Good graeiousl '^ I thought, " it must be 
eleven o^cloek, for there are the gendarmes 
from Quimperl6.^^ 

I looked at my watch; it was only half-past 
eight, and as the gendarmes made their rounds 
every Thursday at eleven, I wondered what had 
brought them out so early to St. Gildas. 

" Of course,** I grumbled, rubbing my eyes, 
" they are after Terrec/* and I jumped into my 
limited bath. 

Before I was completely dressed I heard a 
timid knock, and opening my door, razor in 
hand, stood astonished and silent. Lys, her 
blue eyes wide with terror, leaned on the 
threshold. 

** My darling! '* I cried, " what on earth is 
the matter? ** But she only climg to me, pant- 
ing like a wounded sea gull. At last, when I 
drew her into the room and raised her face to 
mine, she spoke in a heart-breaking voice: 

" Oh, Dick! they are going to arrest you, 
but I will die before I believe one word of what 
they say. No, don't ask me,** and she began 
to sob desperately. 

When I found that something really serious 
was the matter, I flung on my coat and cap, 
and, slipping one arm about her waist, went 
down the stairs and out into the road. Four 
gendarmes sat on their horses in front of the 



THE PURPLE EMPEROR. 21 

cafe door; beyond them, the entire population 
of St. Oildas gaped, ten deep. 

" Hello, Durandl ^* I said to the brigadier, 
** what the devil is this I hear about arresting 
me?^' 

*^ It^s true, mon ami,'' replied Durand with 
sepulchral sympathy. I looked him over from 
the tip of his spurred boots to his sxdphur-yel- 
low sabre belt, then upward, button by button, 
to his disconcerted face. 

"What for?'' I said scornfully. "Don't 
try any cheap sleuth work on me I Speak up, 
man, what's the trouble? " 

The Purple Emperor, who sat in the door- 
way staring at me, started to speak, but thought 
better of it and got up and went into the house. 
The gendarmes rolled their eyes mysteriously 
and looked wise. 

"Come, Durand," I said impatiently, 
"what's the charge?" 

" Murder," he said in a faint voice. 

"What I" I cried incredulously. "Non- 
sensel Do I look like a murderer? Get ofiE 
your horse, you stupid, and tell me who's mur- 
dered." 

Durand got down, looking very silly, and 
came up to me, ofiEering his hand with a pro- 
pitiatory grin. 

"It was the Purple Emperor who de- 
nounced you! See, they found your handker- 
chief at Ids door ^" 



22 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

" Whose door, for Heaven's sake? " I cried, 

*' Why, the Bed Admiral'sl '' 

"The Bed Admiral's? What has he 
done?'' 

" Nothing — ^he's only been murdered." 

I could scarcely believe -my senses, although 
they took me over to the little stone cottage and 
pointed out the blood-spattered room. But 
the horror of the thing was that the corpse of 
the murdered man had disappeared, and there 
only remained a nauseating lake of blood on 
the stone floor, in the centre of which lay a hu- 
man hand. There was no doubt as to whom 
the hand belonged, for everybody who had ever 
seen the Bed Admiral knew that the shrivelled 
bit of flesh which lay in the thickening blood 
was the hand of the Bed Admiral. To me it 
looked like the severed claw of some gigantic 
bird. 

** Well," I said, '* there's been murder com- 
mitted. Why don't you do something? " 

" What ? " asked Durand. 

"I don't know. Send for the Commis- 
saire." 

" He's at Quimperl6. I telegraphed." 

" Then send for a doctor, and find out how 
long this blood has been coagulating." 

** The chemist from Quimperl6 is here; he's 
a doctor." 

"What does he say?" 

" He says that he doesn't know." 



THE PUBPLE EMPEBOB. 23 

"And who are you going to arrest?'' I in- 
quired^ turning away from the spectacle on the 
floor. 

*^ I don't know," said the brigadier solemn- 
ly; " you are denounced by the Purple Emperor, 
because he found your handkerchief at the door 
when he went out this morning." 

"Just like a pig-headed Bretonl" I ex- 
claimed, thoroughly angry. " Did he not men- 
tion Yves Terrec? " 

"No." 

" Of course not," I said. " He overlooked 
the fact that Terrec tried to shoot his father 
last night, and that I took away his gun. All 
that counts for nothing when he finds my hand- 
kerchief at the murdered man's door." 

" Come into the caf 6," said Durand, much 
disturbed, "we can talk it over, there. Of 
course. Monsieur Barrel, I have never had the 
faintest idea that you were the murdererl " 

The four gendarmes and I walked across the 
road to the Groix Inn and entered the caf 6. It 
was crowded with Britons, smoking, drinking, 
and jabbering in half a dozen dialects, all 
equally unsatisfactory to a civilized ear; and I 
pushed through the crowd to where little Max 
Fortin, the chemist of Quimperl6, stood smok- 
ing a vile cigar. 

" This is a bad business," he said, shaking 
hands and offering me the mate to his cigar, 
which I politely declined. 
3 



24 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

'' Now, Monsieur Fortin/^ I said, ** it appears 
that the Purple Emperor found my handker- 
chief near the murdered man^s door this morn- 
ing, and so he concludes ^' — ^here I glared at the 
Purple Emperor — ^**that I am the assassin. I 
will now ask him a question,*^ and turning on 
him suddenly, I shouted, " What were you do- 
ing at the Eed Admirals door?'* 

The Purple Emperor started and turned 
pale, and I pointed at him triumphantly. 

" See what a sudden question will do. Look 
how embarrassed he is, and yet I do not charge 
him with murder; and I tell you, gentlemen, 
that man there knows as well as I do who was 
the murderer of the Eed Admiral! '* 

" I don't! '' bawled the Purple Emperor. 

'' You do,'' I said. " It was Yves Terrec." 

^^I don't believe it," he said obstinately, 
dropping his voice. 

** Of course not, being pig-headed." 

^*I am not pig-headed," he roared again, 
"but I am mayor of St. Gildas, and I do 
not believe that Yves Terrec killed his 
father." 

" You saw him try to kill him last night? " 

The mayor grunted. 

*^ And you saw what I did." 

He grunted again. 

" And," I went on, " you heard Yves Terrec 
threaten to kill his father. You heard him 
curse the Eed Admiral and swear to kill him. 



THE PUEPLE EMPEROE. 25 

Now the father is murdered and his body is 
gone/' 

"And your handkerchief?'' sneered the 
Purple Emperor. 

" I dropped it, of course." 

"And the seaweed gatherer who saw you 
last night lurking about the Red Admirars 
cottage/' grinned the Purple Emperor. 

I was startled at the man's malice. 

"That wiU do," I said. "It is perfectly 
true that I was walking on the Bannalec road 
last night, and that I stopped to close the Red 
Admiral's door, which was ajar, although his 
light was not burning. After that I went up 
the road to the Dinez Woods, and then walked 
over by St. Julien, whence I saw the seaweed 
gatherer on the cliffs. He was near enough for 
me to hear what he sang. What of that? " 

" What did you do then? " 

" Then I stopped at the shrine and said a 
prayer, and then I went to bed and slept until 
Brigadier Durand's gendarmes awoke me with' 
their clatter." 

"Now, Monsieur Barrel," said the Purple 
Emperor, lifting a fat finger and shooting a 
wicked glance at me, " Now, Monsieur Barrel, 
which did you wear last night on your mid- 
night stroll — ^sabots or shoes? " 

I thought a moment. " Shoes — ^no, sabots. 
I just slipped on my chaussons and went out 
in my sabots." 



26 THE MYSTBBY OP CHOICE. 

** Which was it, shoes or sabots?" snarled 
the Purple Emperor. 

'' Sabots, you fool.'' 

" Are these your sabots? *' he asked, lifting 
up a wooden shoe with my initials cut on the 
instep. 

^^Ye8,''IrepKed. 

" Then how did this blood come on the other 
one? '^ he shouted, and held up a sabot, the mate 
to the first, on which a drop of blood had spat- 
tered. 

"I haven't the least idea,'* I said calmly; 
but my heart was beating very fast and I was 
furiously angry. 

"You blockhead!'' I said, controlling my 
rage, "I'll make you pay for this when they 
catch Yves Terrec and convict him. Briga- 
dier Durand, do your duty if you think I am 
under suspicion. Arrest me, but grant me 
one favour. Put me in the Eed Admiral's 
cottage, and I'll see whether I can't find some 
clew that you have overlooked. Of course, 
I won't disturb anything until the Com- 
missaire arrives. Bah! You all make me 
very ill." 

" He's hardened," observed the Purple Em- 
peror, wagging his head. 

" What motive had I to kill the Eed Ad- 
miral? " I asked them all scornfully. And they 
all cried: 

" None! Yves Terrec is the man! " 



THE PUEPLE EMPEROB. 27 

Passing out of the door I swung around and 
shook my finger at the Purple Emperor. 

*^0h, 1^11 make you dance for this, my 
friend/* I said; and I followed Brigadier Du- 
rand across the street to the cottage of the mur- 
dered man. 

in. 

They took me at my word and placed a 
gendarme with a bared sabre at the gateway by 
the hedge. 

" Give me your parole/' said poor Durand, 
*' and I will let you go where you wish.*' But 
I refused, and began prowling about the cottage 
looking for clews. I found lots of things that 
some people would have considered most im- 
portant, such as ashes from the Bed Admiral's 
pipe, footprints in a dusty vegetable bin, bot- 
tles smelling of Pouldu cider, and dust—oh, 
lots of dustl — ^but I was not an expert, only a 
stupid, everyday amateur; so I defaced the 
footprints with my thick shooting boots, and I 
declined to examine the pipe ashes through a 
microscope, although the Bed Admiral's micro- 
scope stood on the table close at hand. 

At last I found what I had been looking for, 
some long wisps of straw, curiously depressed 
and flattened in the middle, and I was certain 
I had found the evidence that would settle 
Yves Terrec for the rest of his life. It was 
plain as the nose on your face. The straws were 



28 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

sabot straws, flattened where the foot had 
pressed them, and sticking straight out where 
they projected beyond the sabot. Now nobody 
in St. Gildas used straw in sabots except a 
fisheniian who lived near St. JuKen, and the 
straw in his sabots was ordinary yellow wheat 
straw! This straw, or rather these straws, were 
from the stalks o| the red wheat which only 
grows inland, aiyi which, everybody in St. Gildas 
knew, Yves Terrec wore in his sabots. I was 
perfectly satisfied; and when, three hours later, 
a hoarse shouting from the Bannalec Boad 
brought me to the window, I was not surprised 
to see Yves Terrec, bloody, dishevelled, hatless, 
with his strong arms bound behind him, walk- 
ing with bent head between two mounted gen- 
darmes. The crowd around him swelled every 
minute, crying: Parricide! parricide! Death 
to the murderer! *' As he passed my window 
I saw great clots of mud on his dusty sabots, 
from the heels of which projected wisps of 
red wheat straw. Then I walked back into the 
E^'d Admiral's study, determined to find what 
the microscope would Show on the wheat straws. 
I examined each one very carefully, and then, 
my eyes aching, I rested my chin on my hand 
and leaned back in the chair. I had not been 
as fortunate as some detectives, for there was 
no evidence that the straws had ever been used 
in a sabot at all. Furthermore, directly across 
the hallway stood a carved Breton chest, and 



^ THE PUBPLE EMPEROR. 29 

now I noticed for the first time that, from be- 
neath the closed lid, doxens of similar red wheat 
straws projected, bent exactly as mine were 
bent by the weight of the Kd. 

I yawned in disgust. It was apparent that 
I was not cut out for a detective, and I bitterly 
pondered over the difference between clews in 
real life and clews in a detective story. After a 
while I rose, walked over to the chest and 
opened the lid. The interior was wadded with 
the red wheat straws, and on this wadding lay 
two curious glass jars, two or three small vials, 
several empty bottles labelled chloroform, a 
collecting jar of cyanide of potassium, and a 
book. In a farther comer of the chest were 
som^ letters bearing English stamps, and also 
the torn coverings of two parcels, all from Eng- 
land, and all directed to the Eed Admiral under 
his proper name of ^* Sieur Louis Jean Terrec, 
St. Gildas, par Moelan, Finist^re.*^ 

All these traps I carried over to the desk, 
shut the lid of the chest, and sat down to read 
the letters. They were written in commercial 
French, evidently by an Englishman. 

Freely translated, the contents of the first 
letter were as follows: 

"London, June 12, 1894. 

'^Dear Monsieur {sic): Your kind fa- 
vour of the 19th inst. received and contents 
noted. The latest work on the Lepidoptera of 
England is Blowzer's How to catch British 



30 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

Butterflies^ with notes and tables^ and an intro- 
duction by Sir Thomas Sniffer. The price of 
this work (in one volume, calf) is £5 or 125 
francs of French money. A post-oflBice order 
will receive our prompt attention. We beg to 
remain, 

"Yours, etc., 

^^FbADLEY & TOOMER, 

" 470 Eegent Square, London, S. W." 

The next letter was even less interesting. 
It merely stated that the money had been re- 
ceived and the book would be forwarded. The 
third engaged my attention, and I shall quote it, 
the translation being a free one: 

" Deab Sib: Your letter of the 1st of July 
was duly received, and we at once referred it to 
Mr. Fradley himself. Mr. Fradley being much 
interested in your question, sent your letter to 
Professor Schweineri,of the Berlin Entomologi- 
cal Society, whose note Blowzer refers toon page 
630,in his Howto catch British Butterflies. We 
have just received an answer from Professor 
Schweineri, which we translate into French — 
(see inclosed slip). Professor Schweineri begs 
to present to you two jars of cythyl, prepared 
under his own supervision. We forward the 
same to you. Trusting that you will find every- 
thing satisfactory,, we remain, 

"Yours sincerely, 

"FbADLEY & TOOMEB.^' 



THE PUEPLE EMPEBOB. 31 

The inclosed slip read as follows: 

"Messrs. Fbadley & Toomeb, 

** Gentlemen: Cythaline, a complex hydro- 
carbon, was first used by Professor Schnoot, of 
Antwerp, a year ago. I discovered an analogous 
formula about the sametimeandnameditcythyl. 
I have used it with great success everywhere. It 
is as certain as a magnet. I beg to present you 
three small jars, and would be pleased to have 
you forward two of them to your correspondent 
in St. Gildas with my compUments. Blowzer's 
quotation of me, on page 630 of his glorious 
work. How to catch British Butterflies, is correct. 
" Yours, etc., 

"Heineich Schweinem, 

P. H. D., D. D., D. S., M. S.'' 

When I had finished this letter I folded it up 
and put it into my pocket with the others. 
Then I opened Blowzer's valuable work. How 
to catch British Butterflies, and turned to 
page 630. 

Now, although the Eed Admiral could only 
have acquired the book very recently, and al- 
though all the other pages were perfectly clean, 
this particular page was thumbed black, and 
heavy pencil marks inclosed a paragraph at the 
bottom of the page. This is the paragraph: 

*' Professor Schweineri says: * Of the two old 
methods used by collectors for the capture of 



82 THE MYSTEEY OF CHOICE. 

the swift-winged, high-flying Apatura Iris, or 
Purple Emperor, the firsik, which was using a 
long-handled net, proved successful once in a 
thousand times; and the second, the placing of 
bait upon the ground, such as decayed meat, 
dead cats, rats, etc., was not only disagreeable, 
even for an enthusiastic collector, but also very 
uncertain. Once in five hundred times woiQd 
the splendid butterfly leave the tops of his fa- 
vourite oak trees to circle about the fetid bait 
offered. I have found cythyl a perfectly sure 
bait to draw this beautiful butterfly to the 
ground, where it can be easily captured. An 
ounce of cythyl placed in a yellow saucer under 
an oak tree, will draw to it every Apatura Iris 
within a radius of twenty miles. So, if any 
collector who possesses a little cythyl, even 
though it be in a sealed bottle in his pocket — ^if 
such a collector does not find a single Apatura 
Iris fluttering close about him within an hour, 
let him be satisfied that the Apatura Iris does 
not inhabit his country.' '* 

When I had finished reading this note I sat 
for a long while thinking hard. Then I ex- 
amined the two jars. They were labelled 
" CythyV* One was full, the other nearly full. 
" The rest must be on the corpse of the Red Ad- 
miral I thought, "no matter if it is in a 
corked bottle ^^ 

I took all the things back to the chest, laid 



THE PUEPLE EMPEROR. 33 

them carefully on the straw, and closed the lid. 
The gendarme sentinel at the gate saluted me 
respectfully as I crossed over to the Groix Inn. 
The Inn was surrounded by an excited crowd, 
and the hallway was choked with gendarmes 
and peasants. On every side they greeted me 
cordially, announcing that the real murderer 
was caught; but I pushed by them without a 
word and ran upstairs to find Lys. She opened 
her door when I knocked and threw both arms 
about my nedc. I took her to my breast and 
kissed her. After a moment I asked her if she 
would ob^ me no matter what I commanded, 
and she said she would, with a proud humility 
that touched me. 

^^ Then go at once to Yvette in St. Julien,^' 
I said. *^ Ask her to harness the dog-cart and 
drive you to the convent in Quimperle. Wait 
for me there. Will you do this without ques- 
tioning me, my darling? '* 

She raised her face to mine. "Ess me,^' 
she said innocently; the next moment she had 
vanished. 

I walked deliberately into the Purple Em- 
peror's room and peered into the gauze-covered 
box which had held the chrysalis of Apatura 
Iris. It was as I expected. The chrysalis was 
empty and transparent, and a great crack ran 
down the middle of its back, but, on the netting 
inside the box, a magnificent butterfly slowly 
waved its burnished purple wings; for the 



34 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

chrysalis had given up its silent tenant^ the but- 
terfly symbol of immortality. Then a great 
fear fell upon me. I know now that it was 
the fear of the Black Priest, but neither then 
nor for years after did I know that the Black 
Priest had ever lived on earth. As I bent 
over the box I heard a confused murmur 
outside the house which ended in a furious 
shout of " Parricide! *' and I heard the 
gendarmes ride away behind a wagon which 
rattled sharply on the flinty highway. I went 
to the window. In the wagon sat Yves Terrec, 
bound and wild-eyed, two gendarmes at either 
side of him, and all around the wagon rode 
mounted gendarmes whose bared sabres scarce- 
ly kept the crowd away. 

*^ Parricide! " they howled. *^ Let him 
die!'^ 

I stepped back and opened the gauze-cov- 
ered box. Very gently but firmly I took the 
splendid butterfly by its closed fore wings and 
lifted it unharmed between my thumb and fore- 
finger. Then, holding it concealed behind my 
back, I went down into the caf 6. 

Of all the crowd that had filled it, shouting 
for the death of Yves Terrec, only three persons 
remained seated in front of the huge empty 
fireplace. They were the Brigadier Durand, 
Max Fortin, the chemist of QuimperlS, and 
the Purple Emperor. The latter looked 
abashed when I entered, but I paid no at- 



THE PURPLE EMPEROR. 35 

tention to him and walked straight to the 
chemist 

*^ Monsieur Fortin/' I said, " do you know 
much about hydrocarbons? '' 

"They are my specialty/* he said aston- 
ished. 

"Have you ever heard of such a thing as 
cythyl?** 

" Schweineri^s cythyl? Oh, yest We use 
it in perfumery.** 

" Good! ** I said. " Has it an odour? ** 

*^No — and, yes. One is always aware of 
its presence, but really nobody can affirm it 
has an odour. It is curious,** he continued, 
looking at me, "it is very curious you 
should have asked me that, for all day I have 
been imagining I detected the presence of 
cythyl.** 

" Do you imagine so now? ** I asked. 

" Yes, more than ever.** 

I sprang to the front door and tossed out the 
butterfly. The splendid creature beat the air 
for a moment, flitted uncertainly hither and 
thither, and then, to my astonishment, sailed 
majestically back into the caf6 and alighted on 
the hearthstone. For a moment I was non- 
plussed, but when my eyes rested on the Purple 
Emperor I comprehended in a flash. 

"lift that hearthstone!** I cried to the 
Brigadier Durand; " pry it up with your scab- 
bard!** 



36 THE lilYSTEBY OP CHOICE. 

The Purple Emperor suddenly fell forward 
in his chair, his face ghastly white, his jaw loose 
with terror. 

**What is C3rthyl?'' I shouted, seizing him 
by the arm; but he plunged heavily from his 
chair, face downward on the floor, and at the 
same moment a cry from the chemist made me 
turn. There stood the Brigadier Durand, one 
hand supporting the hearthsto^e, one hand 
raised in horror. There stood Max Fortin, the 
chemist, rigid with excitement, and below, in the 
hollow bed where the hearthstone had rested, 
lay a crushed mass of bleeding human flesh, 
from the midst of which stared a cheap glass 
eye. I seized the Purple Emperor and dragged 
him to his feet. 

" Look! '* I cried; *' look at yoxir old friend, 
the Eed Admiral!" but he only smiled in a 
vacant way, and rolled his head muttering; 
^^Bait for butterfliesi Cythyl! Oh, no, no, 
no! You can't do it. Admiral, d'ye see. I 
alone own the Purple Emperor I I alone am 
the Purple Emperorl " 

And the same carriage that bore me to 
Quimperl6 to claim my bride, carried him to 
Quimper, gagged and bound, a foaming, howl- 
ing lunatic. 

This, then, is the story of the Purple Em- 
peror. I might tell you a pleasanter story if 
I chose; but concerning the fish that I had 



THE PUBPLB EMPEBOR 37 

hold of^ whether it was a sahnon^ a grilse^ 
or a sea trout^ I may not say^ because I haye 
promised Lys^ and she has promised me^ that 
no power on earth shall wring from onr lips 
the mortifying confession that the fish es- 
caped. 



POMPE FUNfiBEE. 



A wind-swept sky, 
The waste of moorland stretching to the west ; 
The 6ea» low moaning in a strange unrest — 

A seagull's cry. 

Washed by the tide. 
The rocks lie sullen in the waning light ; 
The foam breaks in long strips of hungry white, 

Dissatisfied. 

Batemait. 

40 



POMPE FUKfcBRE. 

In the days when the keepers of the house shall 
tremble. 

When I first saw the sexton he was standing 
motionless behind a stone. Presently he moved 
on again^ pausing at times^ and turning right 
and left with that nervous, jerky motion that 
always chills me. 

His path lay across the blighted moss and 
withered leaves scattered in moist layers along 
the bank of the little brown stream, and I, won- 
dering what his errand might be, followed, pass- 
ing silently over the rotting forest mould. Once 
or twice he heard me, for I saw him stop short, 
a blot of black and orange in the sombre woods; 
but he always started on again, hurrying at 
times as though the dead might grow impa- 
tient. 

For the sexton that I followed through the 
November forest was one of those small crea- 
tures that God has sent to bury little things that 
die alone in the world. Undertaker, sexton, 
mute, and gravedigger in one, this thing, robed 
41 



42 THE lilYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

in black and orange^ buries all things that die 
unheeded by the worid. And so they call it — 
this little beetle in black and orange — ^the 
" sexton/' 

How he hurried 1 I looked up into the gray 
sky where ashen branches, interiaced, swayed 
in unf elt winds, and I heard the dry leaves rat- 
tle in the tree tops, and the thud of acorns on 
the mould. A sombre bird peered at me from 
a heap of brush, then ran pattering over the 
leaves. 

The sexton had reached a bit of broken 
ground, and was scuffling over sticks and gul- 
leys toward a brown tuft of withered grass 
above. I dared not help him; besides, I could 
not bring myself to touch him, he was so hor- 
ribly absorbed in his errand. 

I halted for a moment. The eagerness of 
this live creature to find his dead and handle 
it; the odour of death and decay in this little 
forest world, where I had waited for spring 
when Lys moved among the flowering gorse, 
singing like a throstle in the wind — all this 
troubled me, and I lagged behind. 

The sexton scrambled over the dead grass, 
raising his seared eyes at every wave of wind. 
The wind brought sadness with it, the scent of 
lifeless trees, the vague rustle of gorse buds, 
yellow and dry as paper flowers. 

Along the stream, rotting water plants, 
scorched and frost-blighted, lay massed above 



POMPE FUNjgjBRE. 43 

the mud. I saw their pallid stems swaying like 
worms in the listless current. 

The sexton had reached a mouldering 
stump, and now he seemed imdecided. I sat 
down on a fallen tree, moist and bleached, that 
crumbled under my touch, leaving a stale odour 
in the air. Overhead a crow rose heavily and 
flapped out into the moorland; the wind rat- 
tled the stark blackthorns; a single drop of 
rain touched my cheek. I looked into the 
stream for some sign of life; there was noth- 
ing, except a shapeless creature that might have 
been a blindworm, lying belly upward on the 
mud bottom. I touched it with a stick. It 
was stiff and dead. 

The wind among the sham paperlike gorse 
buds filled the woods with a silken rustle. I 
put out my hand and touched a yellow blos- 
som; it felt like an immortelle on a funeral 
pillow. 

The sexton had moved on again; some- 
thing, perhaps a musty spider's web, had stuck 
to one leg, and he dragged it as he laboured on 
through the wood. Some little field mouse 
torn by weasel or kestrel, some crushed mole, 
some tiny dead pile of fur or feather, lay not far 
off, stricken by God or man or brother crea- 
ture. And the sexton knew it — ^how, God 
knows! But he knew it, and hurried on to his 
tryst with the dead. 

His path now lay along the edge of a tidal 



44 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

inlet from the Groix Eiver. I looked down at 
the gray water through the leafless branches, 
and I saw a small snake, head raised, swim from 
a submerged clot of weeds into the shadow of a 
rock. There was a curlew, too, somewhere in 
the black swamp, whose dreary, persistent call 
cursed the silence. 

I wondered when the sexton would fly; for 
he could fly if he chose; it is only when the 
dead are near, very near, that he creeps. The 
soiled mess of cobweb still stuck to him, and 
his progress was impeded by it. Once I saw 
a small brown and white spider, striped like 
a zebra, running swiftly in his tracks, but the 
sexton turned and raised his two clubbed fore- 
legs in a horrid imploring attitude that still had 
something of menace imder it. The spider 
backed away and sidled under a stone. 

When anything that is dying — sick and close 
to death — ^falls upon the face of the earth, some- 
thing moves in the blue above, floating like a 
moat; then another, then others. These specks 
that grow out of the fathomless azure vault are 
jewelled flies. They come to wait for Death. 

The sexton also arranges rendezvous with 
Death, but never waits; Death must arrive the 
first. 

When the heavy clover is ablaze with paint- 
ed wings, when bees hum and blunder among 
the white-thorn, or pass by like swift singing 
bullets, the sexton snaps open his black and 



POMPE FUNi:BRE. 45 

orange wings and hums across the clover with 
the hees. Death in a scented garden^ the 
tokens of the plague on a fair young breast, the 
gray flag of fear in the face of one who reels 
into the arms of Destruction, the sexton 
scrambling in the lap of spring, folding his 
sleek wings, unfolding them to ape the buzz of 
bees, passing over sweet clover tops to the pu- 
trid flesh that summons him — ^these things 
must be and will be to the end. 

The sexton was running now — ^running fast, 
trailing the cobweb over twigs and mud. The 
edge of the wood was near, for I could see the 
winter wheat, like green scenery in a theatre, 
stretching for miles across the cliffs, crude as 
painted grass. And as I crept through the 
brittle forest fringe, I saw a figure lying face 
downward in the wheat — a girPs slender form, 
limp, motionless. 

The sexton darted under her breast. 

Then I threw myself down beside her, cry- 
ing, **Lys! Lysl'' And as I cried, the icy 
rain burst out across the moors, and the trees 
dashed their stark limbs together till the whole 
spectral forest tossed and danced, and the wind 
roared among the cliffs. 

And through the Dance of Death Lys trem- 
bled in my arms, and sobbed and clung to me, 
murmuring that the Purple Emperor was dead; 
but the wind tore the words from bfer white lips, 
and flung them out across the sea, where the 



46 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

winter lightning lashed the stark heights of 
Groix. 

Then the fear of death was stilled in my 
soTil, and I raised her from the ground, holding 
her close. 

And I saw the sexton, just beyond us, hurry 
across the ground and seek shelter under a little 
dead skylark, stiff-winged, muddy, lying alone 
in the rain. 

In the storm, above us, a bird hovered sing- 
ing through the rain. It 'passed us twice, still 
singing, and as it passed again we saw the 
shadow it cast upon the world was whiter than 
snow. 



THE MESSENGER 



Little gray messenger, 
Robed like painted Death, 
Tour robe is dost. 
Whom do you seek 
Among lilies and closed buds 
At dusk f 

Among lilies and closed buds 

At dusk, 
Whom do you seek, 
Little gray messenger. 
Robed in the awful panoply 
Of painted Death f 

R.W. 

48 



THE MESSENGER 

All-wise, 
Hast thou seen all there is to see with thy two eyest 
Dost thou know all there is to know, and so, 
Omniscient, 
Darest thou still to say thy brother lies! 

R.W.C. 

"The bullet entered here/' said Max For- 
tin, and he placed his middle finger over a 
smooth hole exactly in the centre of the fore- 
head. 

I sat down upon a mound of dry seaweed 
and unslung my fowling piece. 

The little chemist cautiously felt the edges 
of the shot-hole, first with his middle finger, 
then with his thumb. 

" Let me see the skull again,*' said I. 

Max Fortin picked it up from the sod. 

"It's like fdl the others," he observed. I 
nodded, without offering to take it from him. 
After a moment he thoughtfully replaced it 
upon the grass at my feet. 

" It's like all the others," he repeated, wip- 
ing his glasses on his handkerchief. "I 
49 



60 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

thought you might care to see one of the skulls, 
so I brought this over from the gravel pit. The 
men from Bannalec are digging yet. They 
ought to stop.'* 

"How many skulls are there altogether?'' 
I inquired. 

** They found thirty-eight skulls; there are 
thirty-nine noted in the list. They lie piled up 
in the gravel pit on the edge of Le Bihan^s 
wheat field. The men are at work yet. Le Bi- 
han is going to stop them." 

"Lefs go over/' said I; and I picked up 
my gun and started across the cliflEs, Fortin on 
one side, M6me on the other. 

"Who has the list?" I asked, lighting my 
pipe. " You say there is a list? " 

"The list was found rolled up in a brass 
cylinder," said the little chemist. He added: 
** You should not smoke here. You know that 
if a single spark drifted into the wheat ^" 

" Ah, but I have a cover to my pipe," said 
I, smiling. 

Fortin watched me as I closed the pepper- 
box arrangement over the glowing bowl of the 
pipe. Then he continued: 

"The list was made out on thick yellow 
paper; the brass tube has preserved it. It is 
as fresh to-day as it was in 1760. You shall 
see it." 

"Is that the date?" 

"The list is dated * April, 1760.' The 



THE MESSENGER, 51 

Brigadier Durand has it. It is not written in 
French/' 

** Not written in French I *' I exclaimed. 

"No/* replied Fortin solemnly, "it is 
written in Breton.'* 

"But/* I protested, "the Breton language 
was never written or printed in 1760.** 

" Except by priests/* said the chemist. 

"I have heard of but one priest who ever 
wrote the Breton language/* I began. 

Fortin stole a glance at my face. 

"You mean — the Black Priest?** he 
asked. 

I nodded. 

Fortin opened his mouth to speak again, 
hesitated, and finally shut his teeth obstinately 
over the wheat stem that he was chewing. 

"And the Black Priest?** I suggested en- 
couragingly. But I knew it was useless; for it 
is easier to move the stars from their courses 
than to make an obstinate Breton talk. We 
walked on for a minute or two in silence. 

"Where is the Brigadier Durand?** I 
asked, motioning M8me to come out of the 
wheat, which he was trampling as though it 
were heather. As I spoke we came in sight of 
the farther edge of the wheat field and the dark, 
wet mass of cliffs beyond. 

" Durand is down there — ^you can see him; 
he stands just behind the Mayor of St. Gildas.** 
'I see,** said I; and we struck straight 



«i 



62 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

down, following a sun-baked cattle path across 
the heather. 

When we reached the edge of the wheat 
field, Le Bihan, the Mayor of St. Gildas, called 
to me, and I tucked my gun under my arm and 
skirted the wheat to where he stood. 

** Thirty-eight skulls,'* he said in his thin, 
high-pitched voice; "there is but one more, 
and I am opposed to further search. I suppose 
Fortin told you? '' 

I shook hands with him, and returned the 
salute of the Brigadier Durand. 

" I am opposed to further search,'* repeated 
Le Bihan, nervously picking at the mass of 
silver buttons which covered the front of his 
velvet and broadcloth jacket like a breastplate 
of scale armour. 

Durand pursed up his lips, twisted his tre- 
mendous mustache, and hooked his thumbs in 
his sabre belt. 

" As for me,** he said, " I am in favour of 
further search.** 

" Further search for what — ^f or the thirty- 
ninth skull? ** I asked. 

Le Bihan nodded. Durand frowned at the 
sunlit sea, rocking like a bowl of molten gold 
from the cliffs to the horizon. I followed his 
eyes. On the dark glistening cliffs, silhouetted 
against the glare of the sea, sat a cormorant, 
black, motionless, its horrible head raised to- 
ward heaven. 



THE MESSENQEB. 53 

** Where is that list, Durand? '' I asked. 

The gendarme nunmaged in his despf^tch 
pouch and produced a brass cylinder about a 
foot long. Very gravely he unscrewed the 
head and dumped out a scroll of thick yellow 
paper closely coyered with writing on both 
sides. At a nod from Le Bihan he handed me 
the scroll. But I could make nothing of the 
coarse writing, now faded to a dull brown. 

"Come, come, Le Bihan,*^ I said impa- 
tiently, " translate it, won't you ? You and Max 
Fortin make a lot of mystery out of nothing, 
it seems.** 

Le Bihan went to the edge of the pit where 
the three Bannalec men were digging, gave an 
order or two in Breton, and turned to me. 

As I came to the edge of the pit the Banna- 
lec men were removing a square piece of sail- 
cloth from what appeared to be a pile of cob- 
blestones. 

" Look! ** said Le Bihan shrilly. I looked. 
The pile below was a heap of skulls. After a 
moment I clambered down the gravel sides of 
the pit and walked over to the men of Bannalec. 
They saluted me gravely, leaning on their 
picks and shovels, and wiping their sweating 
faces with sunburned hands. 

** How many? ** said I in Breton. 

" Thirty-eight,** they replied. 

I glanced around. Beyond the heap of 
skulls lay two piles of human bones. Beside 



54 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

these was a mound of broken, rusted bits of iron 
and steel. Looking closer, I saw that this 
mound was composed of rusty bayonets, sabre 
blades, scythe blades, with here and there a tar- 
nished buckle attached to a bit of leather hard 
as iron. 

I picked up a couple of buttons and a belt 
plate. The buttons bore the royal arms of 
England; the belt plate was emblazoned with 
the English arms, and also with the num- 
ber " 21:' 

" I have heard my grandfather speak of the 
terrible English regiment, the 27th Foot, which 
landed and stormed the fort up there,'' said one 
of the Bannalec men. 

"Ohl'' said I; *Hhen these are the bones 
of English soldiers?'' 

" Yes," said the men of Bannalec. 

Le Bihan was calling to me from the edge 
of the pit above, and I handed the belt plate 
and buttons to the men and climbed the side of 
the excavation. 

*^Well," said I, trying to prevent M8me 
from leaping up and licking my face as I 
emerged from the pit, ^^ I suppose you know what 
these bones are. What are you going to do 
with them? " 

'^ There was a man," said Le Bihan angrily, 
*^an Englishman, who passed here in a dog- 
cart on his way to Quimper about an hour ago, 
and what do you suppose he wished to do? " 



THE MESSENGEB. 65 

^* Buy the relics? ** I asked, smiling. 

"Exactly — ^the pig!*' piped the mayor of 
St. Gildas. " Jean Marie Tregunc, who found 
the bones, was standing tljere where Max For- 
tin stands, and do you know what he answered? 
He spat upon the ground, and said: *Pig of 
an Englishman, do you take me for a desecrator 
of graves? ** 

I knew Tregunc, a sober, blue-eyed Breton, 
who lived from one year's end to the other with- 
out being able to afford a single bit of meat for 
a meal. 

" How much did the Englishman offer Tre- 
gunc? '* I asked. 

" Two hundred francs for the skulls alone.'* 

I thought of the relic hunters and the relic 
buyers on the battlefields of our civil war. 

" Seventeen hundred and sixty is long ago,'' 
I said. 

*^ Respect for the dead can never die," said 
Fortin. 

" And the English soldiers came here to kill 
your fathers and burn your homes," I con- 
tinued. 

"They were murderers and thieves, but — 
they are dead," said Tregunc, coming up from 
the beach below, his long sea rake balanced on 
his dripping jersey. 

" How much do you earn every year, Jean 

Marie? " I asked, turning to shake hands with 

him. 

5 



66 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

*^Two hundred and twenty francs, mon- 
sieur/* 

** Forty-five dollars a year/' I said. ^^ Bah I 
you are worth more^ Jean. Will you take care 
of my garden for me? My wife wished me to 
ask you. I think it would be worth one hun- 
dred francs a month to you and to me. Come 
on, Le Bihan — come along, Fortin — and you, 
Durand. I want somebody to translate that list 
into French for me.** 

Tregunc stood gazing at me, his blue eyes 
dilated. 

^^ You may begin at once,** I said, smiling, 
*^ if the salary suits you? ** 

"It suits,** said Tregunc, fumbling for his 
pipe in a silly way that annoyed Le Bihan. 

" Then go and begin your work,** cried the 
mayor impatiently; and Tregunc started across 
the moors toward St. Gildas, taking off his 
velvet-ribboned cap to me and gripping his sea 
rake very hard. 

" You offer him more than my salary,** said 
the mayor, after a moment's contemplation of 
his silver buttons. 

" Pooh I ** said I, " what do you do for your 
salary except play dominoes with Max Fortin at 
the Groix Inn? ** 

Le Bihan turned red, but Durand rattled 
his sabre and winked at Max Fori;in, and I 
slipped my arm through the arm of the sulky 
magistrate, laughing. 



THE MESSENGER. 57 

" There's a shady spot under the cliff/' I 
said; " come on, Le Bihan, and read me what 
is in the scroll/' 

In a few moments we reached the shadow of 
the cliff, and I threw myself upon the turf, chin 
on hand, to listen. 

The gendarme, Durand, also sat down, twist- 
ing his mustache into needlelike points, ^or- 
tin leaned against the cliff, polishing his glasses 
and examining us with vague, near-sighted 
eyes; and Le Bihan, the mayor, planted him- 
self in our midst, rolling up the scroll and tuck- 
ing it under his arm. 

" First of all," he began in a shrill voice, " I 
am going to light my pipe, and while lighting 
it I shall tell you what I have heard about the 
attack on the fort yonder. My father told me; 
his father told him." 

He jerked his head in the direction of the 
ruined fort, a small, square stone structure on 
the sea cliff, now nothing but crumbling walls. 
Then he slowly produced a tobacco pouch, a bit 
of flint and tinder, and a long-stemmed pipe 
fitted with a microscopical bowl of baked clay. 
To fill such a pipe requires ten minutes' close 
attention. To smoke it to a finish takes but 
four puffs. It is very Breton, this Breton pipe. 
It is the crystallization of everything Breton. 

** 60 on," said I, lighting a cigarette. 

" The fort," said the mayor, " was built by 
Louis XrV, and was dismantled twice by the 



58 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

English. Louis XV restored it in 1739. In 
1760 it was carried by assault by the English. 
They came across from the island of Groix — 
three shiploads — and they stormed the fort 
and sacked St. Julien yonder, and they started 
to bnm St. Gildas — ^you can see the marks of 
their bullets on my house yet; but the men of 
Bannalec and the men of Lorient fell upon 
them with pike and scythe and blunderbuss, 
and those who did not run away lie there below 
in the gravel pit now — ^thirty-eight of them.^* 

" And the thirty-ninth skull? '* I asked, fin- 
ishing my cigarette. 

The mayor had succeeded in filling his pipe, 
and now he began to put his tobacco pouch 
away. 

"The thirty-ninth skull,*' he mumbled, 
holding the pipestem between his defective 
teeth — ^Hhe thirty-ninth skull is no business 
of mine. I have told the Bannalec men to 
cease digging.'* 

" But what is — ^whose is the missing skull? '* 
I persisted curiously. 

The mayor was busy trying to strike a spark 
to his tinder. Presently he set it aglow, ap- 
plied it to his pipe, took the prescribed four 
puffs, knocked the ashes out of the bowl, and 
gravely replaced the pipe in his pocket. 

" The missing skull? '* he asked. 

" Yes,'* said I impatiently. 

The mayor slowly unrolled the scroll and 



THE MESSENGER. 69 

began to read^ translating from the Breton into 
French. And this is what he read: 

"On thb Cuffs of St. Gildas, 
"4pn7 13, 1760. 
*^ On this day, by order of the Count of So- 
isic, general in chief of the Breton forces now 
lying in Kerselec Forest, the bodies of thirty- 
eight English soldiers of the 27th, 60th, and 
72d regiments of Foot were buried in this spot, 
together with their arms and equipments.'* 

The mayor paused and glanced at me re- 
flectively. 

" Go on, Le Bihan,** I said. 

*^With them,** continued the mayor, turn- 
ing the scroll and reading on the other side, 
" was buried the body of that vile traitor who be- 
trayed the fort to the English. The manner of 
his death was as follows: By order of the most 
noble Count of Soisic, the traitor was first brand- 
ed upon the forehead with the brand of an arrow- 
head. The iron burned through the flesh, and 
was pressed heavily so that the brand should 
even bum into the bone of the skull. The trai- 
tor was then led out and bidden to kneel. He 
admitted having guided the English from the 
island of Groix. Although a priest and a 
Frenchman, he had violated his priestly office 
to aid him in discovering the password to the 
fort. This password he extorted during con- 



60 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

f ession from a young Breton girl who was in the 
habit of rowing across from the island of Groix 
to visit her husband in the fort. When the fort 
fell, this young girl, crazed by the death of her 
husband, sought the Count of Soisic and told 
how the priest had forced her to confess to him 
all she knew about the fort. The priest was 
arrested at St. Qildas as he was about to cross 
the river to Lorient. When arrested he cursed 
the girl, Marie Trevec ^* 

" WhatI '' I exclaimed, '' Marie Trevec! '' 

*^ Marie Trevec,'^ repeated Le Bihan; "the 
priest cursed Marie Trevec, and all her family 
and descendants. He was shot as he knelt, hav- 
ing a mask of leather over his face, because 
the Bretons who composed the squad of exe- 
cution refused to fire at a priest unless his 
face was concealed. The priest was rAbb6 
Sorgue, commonly known as the Black Priest 
on account of his dark face and swarthy eye- 
brows. He was buried with a stake through 
his heart.*' 

Le Bihan paused, hesitated, looked at me, 
and handed the manuscript back to Durand. 
The gendarme took it and slipped it into the 
brass cylinder. 

" So,*' said I, " the thirty-ninth skull is the 
skull of the Black Priest.'' 

^*Yes," said Fortin. "I hope they won't 
find it." 

'^I have forbidden them to proceed," said 



THE MESSENGER. 61 

the mayor querulously. ^* You heard me, Max 
Fortin/^ 

I rose and picked up my gun. Mome came 
and pushed his head into my hand. 

" Thaf 8 a fine dog," observed Durand, also 
rising. 

"Why donH you wish to find his skull?'* 
I asked Le Bihan. " It would be curious to see 
whether the arrow brand really burned into the 
bone.*' 

"There is something in that scroll that I 
didn't read to you/' said the mayor grimly. 
" Do you wish to know what it is? " 

" Of course," I replied in surprise, 

"Give me the scroll again, Durand," he 
said; then he read from the bottom: " I, PAbb6 
Sorgue, forced to write the above by my execu- 
tioners, have written it in my own blood; and 
with it I leave my curse. My curse on St. Gil- 
das, on Marie Trevec, and on her descendants. 
I will come back to St. Gildas when my remains 
are disturbed. Woe to that Englishman whom 
my branded skull shall touch! " 

"What roti*" I said. "Do you believe it 
was really written in his own blood? " 

"I am going to test it," said Fortin, "at 
the request of Monsieur le Maire. I am not 
anxious for the job, however." 

" See," said Le Bihan, holding out the scroll 
to me, " it is signed, ^ TAbb^ Sorgue.' " 

I glanced curiously over the paper. 



62 THE MYSTEBY OP CHOICE. 

*' It must be the Black Priest/' I said. "He 
was the only man who wrote in the Breton lan- 
guage. This is a wonderfully interesting dis- 
covery, for now, at last, the mystery of the 
Black Priest's disappearance is cleared up. You 
will, of course, send this scroll to Paris, Le 
Bihan?'' 

" No,'' said the mayor obstinately, *^ it shall 
be buried in the pit below where the rest of the 
Black Priest lies." 

I looked at him and recognised that argu- 
ment would be useless. But still I said, "It 
will be a loss to history. Monsieur Le Bihan." 

" All the worse for history, then," said the 
enlightened Mayor of St. Gildas. 

We had sauntered back to the gravel pit 
while speaking. The men of Bannalec were 
carrying the bones of the English soldiers to- 
ward the St. Gildas cemetery, on the cliffs to 
the east, where already a knot of white-coiffed 
women stood in attitudes of prayer; and I saw 
the sombre robe of a priest among the crosses of 
the little graveyard. 

** They were thieves and assassins; they are 
dead now," muttered Max Fortin. 

" Eespect the dead," repeated the Mayor of 
St. Gildas, looking after the Bannalec men. 

"It was written in that scroll that Marie 
Trevec, of Groix Island, was cursed by the 
priest— she and her descendants," I said, touch- 
ing Le Bihan on the arm. " There was a Marie 



THE MESSENQEK. 63 

Trevec who married an Yves Trevec of St. Gil- 
das '' 

" It is the same/* said Le Bihan, looking at 
me obliquely. 

"OhI'* said I; "then they were ancestors 
of my wife.'* 

" Do you fear the curse? " asked Le Bihan. 

"What?** Ilatlghed. 

"There was the case of the Purple Em- 
peror,** said Max Fortin timidly. 

Startled for a moment, I faced him, then 
shrugged my shoulders and kicked at a smooth 
bit of rock which lay near the edge of the pit, 
almost embedded in gravel. 

" Do you suppose the Purple Emperor drank 
himself crazy because he was descended from 
Marie Trevec?** I asked contemptuously. 

" Of course not,** said Max Fortin hastily. 

"Of course not,** piped the mayor. "I 
only Hello I what's that you*re kick- 
ing?** 

"What?** said I, glancing down, at the 
same time involuntarily giving another kick. 
The smooth bit of rock dislodged itself and 
rolled out of the loosened gravel at my feet. 

"The thirty-ninth skulll** I exclaimed. 
** By jingo, its the noddle of the Black Priestl 
See! there is the arrowhead branded on the 
front!** 

The mayor stepped back. Max Fortin also 
retreated. There was a pause, during which I 



64 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

looked at them, and they looked anjrwhere but 
at me. 

" I don't like it/* said the mayor at last, in a 
husky, high voice. " I don't like it! The scroll 
says he will come back to St. Gildas when his 
remains are disturbed. I — ^I don't like it. Mon- 
sieur Barrel ^" 

" Bosh! '' said I; " the poor wicked devil is 
where he can't get out. For Heaven's sake, Le 
Bihan, what is this stuflE you are talking in the 
year of grace 1896?" 

The mayor gave me a look. 

" And he says ^ Englishman.' You are an 
Englishman, Monsieur Barrel," he announced. 

"You know better. You know I'm an 
American." 

" It's all the same," said the Mayor of St. 
Oildas, obstinately. 

" No, it isn*t! " I answered, much exasper- 
ated, and deliberately pushed the skull till it 
rolled into the bottom of the gravel pit below. 

"Cover it up," said I; "bury the scroll 
with it too, if you insist, but I thiii you ought 
to send it to Paris. Bon't look so gloomy, Por- 
tin, unless you believe in were-wolves and 
ghosts. Hey! what the — ^what the devil's the 
matter with you, anjrway? What are you star- 
ing at, Le Bihan? " 

"Come, come," muttered the mayor in a 
low, tremulous voice, "it's time we got out of 
this. Bid you see? Bid you see, Portin? " 



THE MESSENGER. ^5 

'^ I saw," whispered Max Fortin, pallid with 
fright. 

The two men were almost running across 
the sunny pasture now, and I hastened after 
them, demanding to know what was the matter. 

"Matter!" chattered the mayor, gasping 
with exasperation and terror. "The skull is 
rolling uphill again I" and he burst into a 
terrified gallop. Max Fortin followed close be- 
hind. 

I watched them stampeding across the pas- 
ture, then turned toward the gravel pit, mysti- 
fied, incredidous. The skull was lying on the 
edge of the pit, exactly where it had been before 
I pushed it over the edge. For a second I 
stared at it; a singular chilly feeling crept up 
my spinal colimm, and I turned and walked 
away, sweat starting from the root of every 
hair on my head. Before I had gone twenty 
paces the absurdity of the whole thing struck 
me. I halted, hot with shame and annoyance, 
and retraced my steps. 

There lay the skull. 

" I rolled a stone down instead of the skull," 
I muttered to myself. Then with the butt 
of my gun I pushed the skull over the edge of 
the pit and watched it roll to the bottom; and 
as it struck the bottom of the pit, Mdme, 
my dog, suddenly whipped his tail between 
his legs, whimpered, and made off across the 
moor. 



66 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

" M6mel ^^ I shouted, angry and astonished; 
but the dog only fled the faster, and I ceased 
calling from sheer surprise. 

*^ What the mischief is the matter with that 
dog! ^' I thought. He had never before played 
me such a trick. 

Mechanically I glanced into the pit, but I 
could not see the skidl. I looked down. The 
skull lay at my feet again, touching them. 

" Good heavens! ^^ I stammered, and struck 
at it blindly with my gunstock. The ghastly 
thing flew into the air, whirling over and over, 
and rolled again down the sides of the pit to 
the bottom. Breathlessly I stared at it, then, 
confused and scarcely comprehending, I stepped 
back from the pit, still facing it, one, ten, 
twenty paces, my eyes almost starting from my 
head, as though I expected to see the thing roll 
up from the bottom of the pit under my very 
gaze. At last I turned my back to the pit and 
strode out across the gorse-covered moorland 
toward my home. As I reached the road that 
winds from St. Gildas to St. Julien I gave one 
hasty glance at the pit over my shoulder. The 
sun shone hot on the sod about the excavation. 
There was something white and bare and round 
on the turf at the edge of the pit. It might 
have been a stone; there were plenty of them 
lying about. 



THE MESSENGEB. 67 



n. 



When I entered my garden I saw Mome 
sprawling on the stone doorstep. He eyed me 
sideways and flopped his tail. 

"Are you not mortified, you idiot dog?'* I 
said, looking about the upper windows for Lys. 

M8me rolled over on his back and raised one 
deprecating f orepaw, as though to ward oflE ca- 
lamity. 

" Don^t act as though I was in the habit of 
beating you to death,'^ I said, disgusted. I had 
never in my life raised whip to the brute. 
" But you are a fool dog,'^ I continued. " No, 
you needn't come to be babied and wept over; 
Lys can do that, if she insists, but I am ashamed 
of you, and you can go to the devil.'' 

Mome slunk off into the house, and I fol- 
lowed, mounting directly to my wife's boudoir. 
It was empty. 

"Where has she gone?" I said, looking 
hard at Mdme, who had followed me. "Oh! 
I see you don't know. Don't pretend you do. 
Come off that lounge! Do you think Lys wants 
tan-coloured hairs all over her lounge? " 

I rang the bell for Catherine and ^Pine, but 
they didn't know where " madame " had gone; 
so I went into my room, bathed, exchanged my 
somewhat grimy shooting clothes for a suit of 
warm, soft knickerbockers, and, after lingering 
some extra moments over my toilet — ^f or I was 



68 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

particfular, now that I had married Lys — ^I went 
down to the garden and took a chair out under 
the fig-trees. 

" Where can she be? '^ I wondered. MSme 
came sneaking out to be comforted, and I for- 
gave him for Lys's sake, whereupon he frisked. 

"You bounding cur," said I, "now what 
on earth started you off across the moor? If 
you do it again Fll push you along with a charge 
of dust shot.*' 

As yet I had scarcely dared think about the 
ghastly hallucination of which I had been a vic- 
tim, but now I faced it squarely, flushing a little 
with mortification at the thought of my hasty 
retreat from the gravel pit. 

" To think,'* I said aloud, " that those old 
woman's tales of Max Fortin and Le Bihan 
should have actually made me see what didn't 
exist at all! I lost my nerve like a schoolboy in 
a dark bedroom." For I knew now that I had 
mistaken a round stone for a skull each time, 
and had pushed a couple of big pebbles into the 
pit instead of the skull itself. 

"By jingol" said I, "Fm nervous; my 
liver must be in a devil of a condition if I see 
such things when Fm awakel Lys will know 
what to give me." 

I felt mortified and irritated and sulky, and 
thought disgustedly of Le Bihan and Max 
Fortin. 

But after a while I ceased speculating, dis- 



THE MESSENGEB. 69 

missed the mayor, the chemist, and the skull 
from my mind, and smoked pensively, watch- 
ing the sun low dipping in the western ocean. 
As the twilight fell for a moment over ocean 
and moorland, a wistful, restless happiness 
filled my heart, the happiness that all men 
know — fldl men who have loved. 

Slowly the purple mist crept out over the 
sea; the clifb darkened; the forest was 
shrouded. 

Suddenly the sky above burned with the 
afterglow, and the world was alight again. 

Cloud after cloud caught the rose dye; the 
clijBfs were tinted with it; moor and pasture, 
heather and forest burned and pulsated with the 
gentle flush. I saw the gulls turning and toss- 
ing above the sand bar, their snowy wings 
tipped with pink; I saw the sea swallows sheer- 
ing the surface of the still river, stained to its 
placid depths with warm reflections of the 
clouds. The twitter of drowsy hedge birds 
broke out in the stillness; a salmon rolled its 
shining side above tide-water. 

The interminable monotone of the ocean in- 
tensified the silence. I sat motionless, holding 
my breath as one who listens to the first low 
rumour of an organ. All at once the pure 
whistle of a nightingale cut the silence, and the 
first moonbeam silvered the wastes of mist-hung 
waters. 

I raised my head. 



70 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

Lys stood before me in the garden. 

When we had kissed each other, we linked 
arms and moved up and down the gravel walks, 
watching the moonbeams sparkle on the sand bar 
as the tide ebbed and ebbed. The broad beds of 
white pinks about us were atremble with hover- 
ing white moths; the October roses hung all 
abloom, perfuming the salt wind. 

"Sweetheart,^' I said, "where is Yvonne? 
Has she promised to spend Christmas with us? '* 

" Yes, Dick; she drove me down from Plou- 
gat this afternoon. She sent her love to you. 
I am not jealous. What did you shoot? '* 

" A hare and four partridges. They are in 
the gun room. I told Catherine not to touch 
them until you had seen them.'' 

Now I suppose I knew that Lys could not 
be particularly enthusiastic over game or guns; 
but she pretended she was, and always scorn- 
fully denied that it was for my sake and not 
for the pure love of sport. So she dragged me 
ofiE to inspect the rather meagre game bag, and 
she paid me pretty compliments and gave a lit- 
tle cry of delight and pity as I lifted the enor- 
mous hare out of the sack by his ears. 

" He'll eat no more of our lettuce," I said, 
attempting to justify the assassination. 

"Unhappy little bunny — ^andwhat a beauty! 
Dick, you are a splendid shot, are you not? " 

I evaded the question and hauled out a par- 
tridge. 



THE MESSENGER. 71 

*'Poor little dead tilings!'^ said Lys in a 
•wliisper; "it seems a pity — doesn^t it, Dick? 
But then you are so clever ^^ 

"We^l have them broiled/^ I said guard- 
edly; "tell Catherine/' 

Catherine came in to take away the game, 
and presently 'Fine Lelocard, Lys's maid, an- 
nounced dinner, and Lys tripped away to her 
boudoir. 

I stood an instant contemplating her bliss- 
fully, thinking, "My boy, you're the happiest 
fellow in the worid — ^you're in love with your 
wife!" 

I walked into the dining room, beamed at 
the plates, walked out again; met Tregunc in 
the hallway, beamed on him; glanced into the 
kitchen, beamed at Catherine, and went up 
stairs, still beaming. 

Before I could knock at Lys's door it 
opened, and Lys came hastily out. When she 
saw me she gave a little cry of relief, and 
nestled close to my breast. 

'^ There is something peering in at my win- 
dow," she said. 

" WhatI " I cried angrily. 

" A man, I think, disguised as a priest, and 
lie has a mask on. He must have climbed up 
by the bay tree." 

I was down the stairs and out of doors in no 
time. The moonlit garden was absolutely de- 
serted. Tregunc came up, and together we 
6 



Y2 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

searched the hedge and shrubbery around the 
house and out to the road. 

*^ Jean Marie/' said I at length, ** loose my 
bulldog — ^he knows you — and take your supper 
on the porch where you can watch. My wife 
says the fellow is disguised as a priest, and wears 
a mask.'* 

Tregunc showed his white teeth in a smile. 
*^ He will not care to venture in here again, I 
think, Monsieur Barrel.*' 

I went back and found Lys seated quietly 
at the table. 

*^The soup is ready, dear," she said. 
"Don't worry; it was only some foolish lout 
from Bannalec. No one in St. Oildas or St. 
Julien would do such a thing." 

I was too much exasperated to reply at first, 
but Lys treated it as a stupid joke, and after a 
while I began to look at it in that light. 

Lys told me about Yvonne, and reminded 
me of my promise to have Herbert Stuart down 
to meet her. 

'^You wicked diplomat!" I protested. 
** Herbert is in Paris, and hard at work for the 
Salon." 

" Don't you think he might spare a week to 
flirt with the prettiest girl in Finist(^re?" in- 
quired Lys innocently. 

'' Prettiest girl! Not much! " I said. 

" Who is, then? " urged Lys. 

I laughed a trifle sheepishly. 



THE MESSENQEB. fgl 

^^ I suppose you mean me, Dick/' said Lys, 
colouring up. 

" Now I bore you, don't I? '' 

*' Bore me? Ah, no, Dief 

After coffee and cigarettes were served I 
spoke about Tregunc, and Lys approved. 

"Poor Jean! he will be glad, won't he? 
What a dear fellow you are! '' 

" Nonsense,'' said I; " we need a gardener; 
you said so yourself, Lys." 

But Lys leaned over and kissed me, and then 
bent down and hugged Mome, who whistled 
through his nose in sentimental appreciation. 

" I am a very happy woman," said Lys. 

"Mdme was a very bad dog to-day," I ob- 
served. 

** Poor Mdme! " said Lys, smiling. 

When dinner was over and Mdme lay snor- 
ing before the blaze — ^for the October nights 
are often chilly in Finist^re — ^Lys curled up in 
the chimney comer with her embroidery, and 
gave me a swift glance from under her droop- 
ing lashes. 

'^You look like a schoolgirl, Lys," I said 
teasingly. "I don't believe you are sixteen 
yet." 

She pushed back her heavy burnished hair 
thoughtfully. Her wrist was as white as surf 
foam. « 

*^Have we been married four years? I 
don't believe it," I said. 



74 THE MYSTEEY OF CHOICE. 

She gave me another swift glance and 
touched the embroidery on her knee, smiling 
faintly. 

"I see/' said I, also smiling at the em- 
broidered garment. *^Do you think it will 
fit?'' 

'*Fit?" repeated Lys. Then she laughed. 

** And/' I persisted, " are you perfectly sure 
that you— er — ^we shall need it? " 

** Perfectly," said Lys. A delicate colour 
touched her cheeks and neck. She held up the 
little garment, all fluffy with misty lace and 
wrought with quaint embroidery. 

^*It is very gorgeous," said I; "don't use 
your eyes too much, dearest. May I smoke a 
pipe?" 

" Of course/' she said, selecting a skein of 
pale blue silk. 

For a while I sat and smoked in silence, 
watching her slender fingers among the tinted 
silks and thread of gold. 

Presently she spoke: "What did you say 
your crest is, Dick? " 

"My crest? Oh, something or other ram- 
pant on a something or other ^" 

"Dick!" 

"Dearest?" 

"Don't be fiippant." 

"But I really forget. It's an ordinary 
crest; everybody in New York has them. No 
family should be without 'em." 



THE MESSENGER. 75 

**You are disagreeable, Dick. Send Jose- 
phine upstairs for my album/* 

" Are you going to put that crest on the — 
the — ^whatever it is? *' 

*^ I am; and my own crest, too/' 

I thought of the Purple Emperor and won- 
dered a little. 

"You didn't know I had one, did you?*' 
she smiled. 

" What is it? *' I replied evasively. 

" You shall see. King for Josephine.'* 

I rang, and, when 'Fine appeared, Lys gave 
her some orders in a low voice, and Josephine 
trotted away, bobbing her wMte-coiffed head 
with a " Bien, madame! " 

After a few minutes she returned, bearing 
a tattered, musty volume, from which the gold 
and blue had mostly disappeared. 

I took the book in my hands and examined 
the ancient emblazoned covers. 

" Lilies! " I exclaimed. 

" Fleur-de-lis," said my wife demurely. 

" Oh! " said I, astonished, and opened the 
book. 

"You have never before seen this book?" 
asked Lys, with a touch of malice in her eyes. 

" You know I haven't. Hello! what's this? 
Oho! So there should he a de before Trevec? 
Lys de Trevec? Then why in the world did 
the Purple Emperor ^" 

" l)ickl " cried Lys, 



76 THE MYSTEBY OP CHOICE. 

« All right/' said L " Shall I read about 
the Sieur de Trevec who rode to Saladin's tent 
alone to seek for medicine for St. Louis? or 
shall I read about — ^what is it? Oh, here it is, 
all down in black and white — ^about the Mar- 
quis de Trevec who drowned himself before 
Alva's eyes rather than surrender the banner 
of the fleur-de-lis to Spain? Ifs all written 
here. But, dear, how about that soldier named 
Trevec who was killed in the old fort on the 
cliff yonder?'' 

^^ He dropped the cfo, and the Trevecs since 
then have been Republicans," said Lys — ^**all 
except me." 

"That's quite right," said I; "it is time 
that we Bepublicans should agree upon some 
feudal system. My dear, I drink to the king! " 
and I raised my wine-glass and looked at Lys. 

** To the king," said Lys, flushing. She 
smoothed out the tiny garment on her knees; 
she touched the glass with her lips; her eyes 
were very sweet. I drained the glass to the 
king. 

After a silence I said: " I will tell the king 
stories. His Majesty shall be amused." 

"His Majesty," repeated Lys softly. 

" Or hers," I laughed. " Who knows? " 

"Who knows?" murmured Lys, with a 
gentle sigh. 

" I know some stories about Jack the Giant- 
Killer," I announced. "Do you, Lys?" 



THE MESSENGER. ^7 

*^I? No, not about a giant-killer, but I 
TsooLOw all about the were-wolf, and Jeanne-la« 
Flanune, and the Man in Purple Tatters, and — ^ 
dear me I I know lots more/^ 

"You are very wise,^^ said I. "I shall 
teach his Majesty English/' 

** And I Breton,^' cried Lys jealously. 

" I shall bring playthings to the king,'' said 
I — "big green lizards from the gorse, little 
gray mullets to swim in glass globes, baby rab- 
bits from the forest of Kerselec " 

*^And I," said Lys, "will bring the first 
primrose, the first branch of aubepine, the first 
jonquil, to the king — ^my king." 

** Our king," said I; and there was peace in 
Finist^re. 

I lay back, idly turning the leaves of the 
curious old volume. 

" I am looking," said I, " for the crest." 

" The crest, dear? It is a priest's head with 
an arrow-shaped mark on the forehead, on a 
field '' 

I sat up and stared at my wife. 

"Dick, whatever is the matter?" she 
smiled. "The story is there in that book. 
Do you care to read it? No? Shall I tell it 
to you? Well, then: It happened in the third 
crusade. There was a monk whom men called 
the Black Priest. He turned apostate, and sold 
himself to the enemies of Christ. A Sieur de 
Trevec burst into the Saracen camp, at the 



^8 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

head of only one hundred lances^ and carried 
the Black Priest away out of the very midst of 
their army/' 

^^ So that is how you come by the crest/* I 
said quietly; but I thought of the branded sloill 
in the gravel pit, and wondered. 

*'Yes/' said Lys. "The Sieur de Trevec 
cut the Black Priest's head off, but first he 
branded him with an arrow mark on the fore- 
head. The book says it was a pious action, and 
the Sieur de Trevec got great merit by it. But 
I think it was cruel, the branding,'' she sighed. 

"Did you ever hear of any other Black 
Priest?" 

" Yes. There was one in the last century, 
here in St. Gildas. He cast a white shadow in 
the sun. He wrote in the Breton language. 
Chronicles, too, I believe. I never saw them. 
His name was the same as that of the old 
chronicler, and of the other priest, Jacques 
Sorgue. Some said he was a lineal descendant 
of the traitor. Of course the first Black Priest 
was bad enough for anything. But if he did 
have a child, it need not have been the ancestor 
of the last Jacques Sorgue. They say this one 
was a holy man. They say he was so good he 
was not allowed to die, but was caught up to 
heaven one day," added Lys, with believing 
eyes. 

I smiled. 

" But he disappeared," persisted Lys. 



THE MESSENGEB. 79 

'* I'm afraid his journey was in another di- 
rection/' I said jestingly, and thoughtlessly 
told her the story of the morning. I had utter- 
ly forgotten the masked man at her window, 
but before I finished I remembered him fast 
enough, and realized what I had done as I saw 
her face whiten. 

*^Lys,'' I urged tenderly, **that was 9nly 
some clumsy clown's trick. You said so your- 
self. You are not superstitious, my dear? " 

Her eyes were on mine. She slowly drew 
the little gold cross from her bosom and kissed 
it. But her lips trembled as they pressed the 
symbol of faith. 

III. 

About nine o'clock the next morning I 
walked into the Groix Inn and sat down at the 
long discoloured oaken table, nodding good- 
day to Marianne Bruy^re, who in turn bobbed 
her white coiffe at me. 

" My clever Bannalec maid," said I, ** what 
is good for a stirrup-cup at the Groix Inn? " 

" Schist? " she inquired in Breton. 

** With a dash of red wine, then," I replied. 

She brought the delicious Quimperl6 cider, 
and I poured a little Bordeaux into it. Mari- 
anne watched me with laughing black eyes. 

**What makes your cheeks so red, Mari- 
anne?" I asked. "Has Jean Marie been 
here?" 



80 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

*^ We are to be married. Monsieur Darrel,*^ 
she laughed. 

^^Ahl Since when has Jean Marie Tre- 
gune lost his head? '* 

"His head? Oh, Monsieur Darrel — ^his 
heart, you meanl *' 

" So I do,'* said I. " Jean Marie is a prac- 
tical f eUow." 

*^ It is all due to your kindness ^^ began 

the girl, but I raised my hand and held up the 
glass. 

"It^s due to himself. To your happiness, 
Marianne; ** and I took a hearty draught of the 
schist. " Now,'' said I, " tell me where I can 
find Le Bihan and Max Fortin.'' 

^^ Monsieur Le Bihan and Monsieur Fortin 
are above in the broad room. I believe they are 
examining the Eed Admiral's eflfects." 

"To send them to Paris? Oh, I know. 
May I go up, Marianne? " 

" And God go with you," smiled the girl. 

When I knocked at the door of the broad 
room above little Max Fortin opened it. Dust 
covered his spectacles and nose; his hat, with 
the tiny velvet ribbons fluttering, was all awry. 

*^ Come in. Monsieur Darrel," he said; " the 
mayor and I are packing up the effects of the 
Purple Emperor and of the poor Bed Ad- 
miral." 

*^The collections?" I asked, entering the 
room. " You must be very careful in packing 



THE MESSENGEB. 81 

those butterfly cases; the slightest jar might 
break wings and antennse^ you know/' 

Le Bihan shook hands with me and pointed 
to the great pile of boxes. 

"The/re all cork lined/' he said, ''but 
Fortin and I are putting felt around each box. 
The Entomological Society of Paris pays the 
freight.'' 

The combined collections of the Eed Ad- 
miral and the Purple Emperor made a mag- 
nificent display. 

I lifted and inspected case after case set 
with gorgeous butterflies and moths, each speci- 
men carefully labelled with the name in Latin. 
There were cases filled with crimson tiger 
moths all aflame with colour; cases devoted to 
the common yellow butterflies; symphonies in 
orange and pale yellow; cases of soft gray and 
dun-coloured sphinx moths; and cases of 
garish nettle-bred butterflies of the numerous 
family of Vanessa. 

All alone in a great case by itself was pinned 
the purple emperor, the Apatura Iris, that fatal 
specimen that had given the Purple Emperor 
his name and quietus. 

I remembered the butterfly, and stood look- 
ing at it with bent eyebrows. 

Le Bihan glanced up from the floor where 
he was nailing down the lid of a box full of 
cases. 

''It is settled, then," said he, " that madame. 



82 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

your wife, gives the Purple Emperor's entire 
collection to the city of Paris? '* 

I nodded. 

" Without accepting anything for it? ** 

"It is a gift/' I said. 

"Including the purple emperor there in 
the case? That butterfly is worth a great deal 
of money/' persisted Le Bihan. 

" You don't suppose that we would wish to 
sell that specimen, do you?" I answered a 
trifle sharply. 

" If I were you I should destroy it/' said the 
mayor in his high-pitched voice. 

"That would be nonsense," said I — ^^^like 
your burying the brass cylinder and scroll yes- 
terday." 

" It was not nonsense," said Le Bihan dog- 
gedly, " and I should prefer not to discuss the 
subject of the scroll." 

I looked at Max Portin, who immediately 
avoided my eyes. 

" You are a pair of superstitious old wom- 
en," said I, digging my hands into my pockets; 
"you swallow every nursery tale that is in- 
vented." 

"What of it?" said Le Bihan sulkily; 
" there's more truth than lies in most of 'em." 

" OhI " I sneered, " does the Mayor of "St. 
Gildas and St. Julien believe in the Loup- 
garou?" 

" No, not in the Loup-garou." 



THE MESSENGEB. 83 

"In what, then — Jeanne-la-Plamme? '* 

**That/' said Le Bihan with conviction, 
''is history/' 

**The devil it is!'' said I; "and perhaps, 
monsieur the mayor, your faith in giants is un- 
impaired? " 

" There were giants — everybody knows it," 
growled Max Fortin. 

"And you a chemistl" I observed scorn- 
fully. 

"Listen, Monsieur Barrel," squeaked Le 
Bihan; "you know yourself that the Purple 
Emperor was a scientific man. I^ow suppose I 
should tell you that he always refused to in- 
clude in his collection a Death's Messenger?" 

" A what? " I exclaimed. 

" You know what I mean — ^that moth that 
flies by night; some call it the Death's Head, 
but in St. Gildas we call it 'Death's Messen- 
ger.'" 

" Oh! " said I, " you mean that big q)hinx 
moth that is commonly known as the * death's- 
head moth.' Why the mischief should the 
people here call it death's messenger? " 

" For himdreds of years it has been known 
as death's messenger in St. Qildas," said Max 
Fortin. "Even Froissart speaks of it in his 
commentaries on Jacques Sorgue's Chronicles. 
The book is in your library." 

" Sorgue? And who was Jacques Sorgue? 
I never read his book." 



84 THE MYSTEKY OF CHOICE. 

*' Jacques Sorgue was the son of some un- 
frocked priest — ^I forget. It was during the 
crusades.'* 

" (Jood HeavensI '* I burst out^ *^ Vre heen 
hearing of nothing but crusades and priests and 
death and sorcery ever since I kicked that skull 
into the gravel pit^ and I am tired of it, I tell 
you frankly. One would think we lived in the 
dark ages. Do you know what year of our Lord 
itis,LeBihan?'' 

** Eighteen hundred and ninety-six/' re- 
plied the mayor. 

** And yet you two hulking men are afraid 
of a death's-head moth.'' 

** I don't care to have one fly into the win- 
dow," said Max Fortin; **it means evil to the 
house and the people in it." 

" God alone knows why he marked one of 
his creatures with a yellow death's head on the 
back," observed Le Bihan piously, **but I 
take it that he meant it as a warning; and 
I propose to profit by it," he added trium- 
phantly. 

*^ See here, Le Bihan," I said; " by a stretch 
of imagination one can make out a skull on the 
thorax of a certain big sphinx moth. What 
of it?" 

** It is a bad thing to touch," said the mayor, 
wagging his head. 

^^It squeaks when handled," added Max 
Fortin. 



THE MESSEN6EB. 85 

*' Some creatures squeak all the time/' I ob- 
served, looking hard at Le Bihan. 

" Pigs/' added the mayor. 

**Ye8, and asses/' I replied. ''Listen, Le 
Bihan: do you mean to tell me that you saw 
that skull roll uphill yesterday? " 

The mayor shut his mouth tightly and 
picked up his hammer. 

" Don't be obstinate/' I said; " I asked you 
a question." 

'' And I refuse to answer/' snapped Le Bi- 
han. "Fortin saw what I saw; let him talk 
about it." 

I looked searchingly at the little chemist. 

" I don't say that I saw it actually roll up 
out of the pit, all by itself," said Fortin with a 
shiver, "but— but then, how did it come up 
out of the pit, if it didn't roll up all by itself? " 

" It didn't come up at all; that was a yellow 
cobblestone that you mistook for the skull 
again/' I replied. *' You were nervous. Max." 

*'A — a very curious cobblestone, Monsieur 
Barrel/' said Fortin. 

" I also was a victim to the same hallucina- 
tion," I continued, " and I regret to say that I 
took the trouble to roll two innocent cobble- 
stones into the gravel pit, imagining each time 
that it was the skull I was rolling." 

'* It was/' observed Le Bihan with a morose 
shrug. 

''It just shows/' said I, ignoring the 



86 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

mayor's remark, " how easy it is to fix up a train 
of coincidences so that the result seems to sa^ 
Your of the supernatural. Now, last night my 
wife imagined that she saw a priest in a mask 
peer in at her window ^^ 

Fortin and Le Bihan scrambled hastily from 
their knees, dropping hammer and nails. 

"W-h-a-t— whafs that?*' demanded the 
mayor. 

I repeated what I had said. Max Fortin 
turned Uvid. 

''My God!'' muttered Le Bihan, "the 
Black Priest is in St. Gildasl " 

''D-don't you — ^you know the old proph- 
ecy?" stammered Fortin; ''Froissart quotes it 
from Jacques Sorgue: 

• When the Black Priest rises from the dead, 
St. Gildas folk shall shriek in bed ; 
When the Black Priest rises from his grave. 
May the good God St. Gildas save I ' " 

** Aristide Le Bihan," I said angrily, *^ and 
you. Max Fortin, I've got enough of this non- 
sense! Some foolish lout from Bannalec has 
been in St. Gildas playing tricks to frighten old 
fools like you. If you have nothing better to 
talk about than nursery legends I'll wait until 
you come to your senses. Good-morning." 
And I walked out, more disturbed than I cared 
to acknowledge to myself. 

The day had become misty and overcast. 



THE MESSENGEB. 87 

Heavy, wet clouds hung in the east. I heard 
the surf thundering against the clifEs, and the 
gray gulls squealed as they tossed and turned 
high in the sky. The tide was creeping across 
the river sands, higher, higher, and I saw 
the seaweed floating on the beach, and the Ian- 
gons springing from the foam, silvery thread- 
like flashes in the gloom. Curlew were flying 
up the river in twos and threes; the timid sea 
swallows skimmed across the moors toward 
some quiet, lonely pool, safe from the coming 
tempest. In every hedge field birds were 
gathering, huddling together, twittering rest- 
lessly. 

When I reached the cliffs I sat down, rest- 
ing my chin on my clenched hands. Already 
a vast curtain of rain, sweeping across the ocean 
miles away, hid the island of Groix. To the 
east, behind the white semaphore on the hills, 
black clouds crowded up over the horizon. 
After a little the thunder boomed, dull, distant, 
and slender skeins of lightning unravelled across 
the crest of the coming storm. Under the cliff 
at my feet the surf rushed foaming over the 
shore, and the langons jumped and skipped and 
quivered until they seemed to be but the re- 
flections of the meshed lightning. 

I turned to the east. It was raining over 

Groix, it was raining at Sainte Barbe, it was 

raining now at the semaphore. High in the 

storm whirl a few gulls pitched; a nearer cloud 

7 



88 THE MYSTEEY OP CHOICE. 

trailed veils of rain in its wake; the sky was 
spattered with lightning; the thunder boomed. 

As I rose to go, a cold raindrop fell upon the 
back of my hand, and another, and yet another 
on my face. I gave a last glance at the sea, 
where the waves were bursting into strange 
white shapes that seemed to fling out menacing 
arms toward me. Then something moved on 
the cliff, something black as the black rock it 
clutched — ^a filthy cormorant, craning its hide- 
ous head at the sky. 

Slowly I plodded homeward across the 
sombre moorland, where the gorse stems glim- 
mered with a dull metallic green, and the 
heather, no longer violet and purple, himg 
drenched and dun-coloured among the dreary 
rocks. The wet turf creaked under my heavy 
boots, the black-thorn scraped and grated 
against knee and elbow. Over all lay a strange 
light, pallid, ghastly, where the sea spray 
whirled across the landscape and drove into my 
face until it grew numb with the cold. In 
broad bands, rank after rank, billow on billow, 
the rain burst out across the endless moors, and 
yet there was no wind to drive it at such a pace. 

Lys stood at the door as I turned into the 
garden, motioning me to hasten; and then for 
the first time I became conscious that I was 
soaked to the skin. 

"How ever in the world did you come to 
stay out when such a storm threatened? ^^ she 



THE MESSENGEB. 89 

said. *'0h, you are dripping! Go quickly 
and change; I have laid your warm underwear 
on the bed, Dick." 

I kissed my wife, and went upstairs to 
change my dripping clothes for something more 
comfortable. 

When I returned to the morning room there 
was a driftwood fire on the hearth, and Lys 
sat in the chimney comer embroidering. 

"Catherine tells me that the fishing fleet 
from Lorient is out. Do you think they are 
in danger, dear? " asked Lys, raising her blue 
eyes to mine as I entered. 

"There is no wind, and there will be no 
sea,'' said I, looking out of the window. Far 
across the moor I could see the black cliffs loom- 
ing in the mist. 

"How it rains!" murmured Lys; "come 
to the fire, Dick." 

I threw myself on the fur rug, my hands in 
my pockets, my head on Lys's knees. 

" Tell me a story," I said. " I feel like a 
boy of ten." 

Lys raised a finger to her scarlet lips. I 
always waited for her to do that. 

" Will you be very still, then? " she said. 

"Stm as death." 

** Death," echoed a voice, very softly. 

" Did you speak, Lys? " I asked, turning so 
that I could see her face. 

"No; did you, Dick?" 



90 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

'' Who said ' death '?'' I asked, startled. 

" Death/* echoed a voice, softly. 

I sprang up and looked about. Lys rose 
too, her needles and embroidery falling to the 
floor. She seemed about to faint, leaning heav- 
ily on me, and I led her to the window and 
opened it a little way to give her air. As I did 
so the chain lightning split the zenith, the 
thunder crashed, and a sheet of rain swept into 
the room, driving with it something that flut- 
tered — something that flapped, and squeaked, 
and beat upon the rug with soft, moist wings. 

We bent over it together, Lys clinging to 
me, and we saw that it was a death's-head moth 
drenched with rain. 

The dark day passed slowly as we sat beside 
the flre, hand in hand, her head against my 
breast, speaking of sorrow and mystery and 
death. For Lys believed that there were things 
on earth that none might imderstand, things 
that must be nameless forever and ever, until 
God rolls up the scroll of life and all is ended. 
We spoke of hope and fear and faith, and the 
mystery of the saints; we spoke of the begin- 
ning and the end, of the shadow of sin, of 
omens, and of love. The moth still lay on the 
floor, quivering its sombre wings in the warmth 
of the fire, the skull and ribs clearly etched 
upon its neck and body. 

" If it is a messenger of death to this house,** 
I said, " why should we fear, Lys? ** 



THE MESSENGE9. 91 

"Death shoiild be welcome to those who 
love God/' murmured Lys, and she drew the 
cross from her breast and Mssed it. 

" The moth might die if I threw it out into 
the storm/' I said after a silence. 

" Let it remain/' sighed Lys. 

Late that night my wife lay sleeping, and 
I sat beside her bed and read in the Chronicle 
of Jacques Sorgue. I shaded the candle, but 
Lys grew restless, and finally I took the book 
down into the morning room, where the ashes 
of the fire rustled and whitened on the hearth. 

The death's-head moth lay on the rug be- 
fore the fire where I had left it. At first I 
thought it was dead, but, when I looked closer 
I saw a lambent fire in its amber eyes. The 
straight white shadow it cast across the floor 
wavered as the candle flickered. 

The pages of the Chronicle of Jacques 
Sorgue were damp and sticky; the illuminated 
gold and blue initials left flakes of azure and 
gilt where my hand brushed them. 

"It is not paper at all; it is thin parch- 
ment," I said to myself; and I held- the discol- 
oured page close to the candle flame and read, 
translating laboriously: 

"I, Jacques Sorgue, saw all these things. 
And I saw the Black Mass celebrated in the 
chapel of St. 6ildas-on-the-CliflE. And it was 
said by the Abb6 Sorgue, my kinsman: for 
which deadly sin the apostate priest was seized 



92 THE MYSTEKY OP CHOICE. 

by the most noble Marquis of Plougastel and 
by him condemned to be burned with hot irons, 
until his seared sold quit its body and fly to its 
master the devil. But when the Black Priest 
lay in the crypt of Plougastel, his master Satan 
came at night and set him free, and carried him 
across land and sea to Mahmoud, which is Sol- 
dan or Saladin. And I, Jacques Sorgue, 
travelling afterward by sea, beheld with my own 
eyes my kinsman, the Black Priest of St. Gil- 
das, borne along in the air upon a vast black 
wing, which was the wing of his master Satan. 
And this was seen also by two men of the crew.*' 
I turned the page. The wings of the moth 
on the floor began to quiver. I read on and 
on, my eyes blurring imder the shifting candle 
flame. I read of battles and of saints, and I 
learned how the great Soldan made his pact 
with Satan, and then I came to the Sieur de 
Trevec, and read how he seized the Black 
Priest in the midst of Saladin^s tents and car- 
ried him away and cut off his head, first brand- 
ing him on the forehead. *^And before he 
suffered,** said the Chronicle, "he cursed the 
Sieur de Trevec and his descendants, and he 
said he would surely return to St. Gildas. * For 
the violence you do to me, I will do violence to 
you. For the evil I suffer at your hands, I will 
work evil on you and your descendants. Woe 
to your children, Sieur de Trevec! * '* There 
was a whirr, a beating of strong wings, and my 



THE MESSENGEB. 93 

candle flashed up as in a sudden breeze. A 
humming filled the room; the great moth 
dated hither and thither^ beating, buzzing, on 
ceiling and wall. I flung down my book and 
stepped forward. Now it lay fluttering upon 
the window sill, and for a moment I had it 
under my hand, but the thing squeaked and I 
shrank back. Then suddenly it darted across 
the candle flame; the light fUured and went out, 
and at the same moment a shadow moved in the 
darkness outside. I raised my eyes to the win- 
dow. A masked face was peering in at me. 

Quick as thought I whipped out my revolver 
and fired every cartridge, but the face advanced 
beyond the window, the glass melting away be- 
fore it like mist, and through the smoke of my 
revolver I saw something creep swiftly into the 
room. Then I tried to cry out, but the thing 
was at my throat, and I fell backward among 
the ashes of the hearth. 

When my eyes unclosed I was lying on the 
hearth, my head among the cold ashes. Slowly 
I got on my knees, rose painfully, and groped 
my way to a chair. On the floor lay my re- 
volver, shining in the pale light of early morn- 
ing. My mind clearing by degrees, I looked, 
shuddering, at the window. The glass was un- 
broken. I stooped stiffly, picked up my re- 
volver and opened the cylinder. Every car- 
tridge had been fired. Mechanically I closed 



94 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

the cylinder and placed the revolver in my 
pocket. The book, the Chronicles of Jacques 
Sorgue, lay on the table beside me, and as I 
started to close it I glanced at the page. It 
was all splashed with rain, and the lettering 
had run, so that the page was merely a confused 
blur of gold and red and black. As I stumbled 
toward the door I cast a fearful glance over my 
shoulder. The death^s-head moth crawled 
shivering on the rug. 

rv. 

The sun was about three hours high. I 
must have slept, for I was aroused by the sud- 
den gallop of horses under our window. People 
were shouting and calling in the road. I sprang 
up and opened the sash. Le Bihan was there, 
an image of helplessness, and Max Fortin stood 
beside him, polishing his glasses. Some gen- 
darmes had just arrived from Quimperl6, and 
I could hear them around the comer of the 
house, stamping, and rattling their sabres and 
carbines, as they led their horses into my 
stable. 

Lys sat up, murmuring half-sleepy, half- 
anxious questions. 

"I don*t know," I answered. ^^ I am go- 
ing out to see what it means." 

" It is like the day they came to arrest you," 
Lys said, giving me a troubled look. But I 



THE MESSENGEB. 96 

Jdssed her^ and laughed at her until she smiled 
too. Then I flung on coat and cap and hurried 
down the stairs. 

The first person I saw standing in the road 
was the Brigadier Durand. 

" Hellol '^ said I, " have you come to arrest 
me again? What the devil is all this fuss 
about, anyway? '* 

"We were telegraphed for an hour ago/' 
said Durand briskly, "and for a sufficient 
reason, I think. Look there. Monsieur Bar- 
rel! '^ 

He pointed to the ground almost under my 
feet. 

" Good heavensi '^ I cried, " where did that 
puddle of blood come from? '* 

"That's what I want to know. Monsieur 
Barrel. Max Fortin found it at daybreak. 
See, if s splashed all over the grass, too. A trail 
of it leads into your garden, across the flower 
beds to your very window, the one that opens 
from the morning room. There is another 
trail leading from this spot across the road to 
the clifl!s, then to the gravel pit, and thence 
across the moor to the forest of Kerselec. We 
are going to mount in a minute and search the 
bosquets. Will you join us? Bon Bieul but 
the fellow bled like an ox. Max Fortin says 
ifs human blood, or I should not have be- 
Ueved it.'' 

The little chemist of Quimperl^ came up at 



96 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

that moment^ rubbing his glasses with a col- 
oured handkerchief. 

"Yes, it is human blood/' he said, "but 
one thing puzzles me: the corpuscles are yel- 
low. I never saw any human blood before with 
yellow corpuscles. But your English Doctor 
Thompson asserts that he has ^^ 

"Well, it's human blood, anyway — ^isn't 
it? '' insisted Durand, impatiently. 

" Ye-es,'' admitted Max Fortin. 

" Then it's my business to trail it," said the 
big gendarme, and he called his men and gave 
the order to mount. 

" Did you hear anything last night? " asked 
Durand of me. 

" I heard the rain. I wonder the rain did 
not wash away these traces.'* 

"They must have come after the rain 
ceased. See this thick splash, how it lies over 
and weighs down the wet grass blades. Pah! " 

It was a heavy, evil-looking clot, and I 
stepped back from it, my throat closing in dis- 
gust. 

"My theory," said the brigadier, "is this: 
Some of those Biribi fishermen, probably the 
Icelanders, got an extra glass of cognac into 
their hides and quarrelled on the road. Some 
of them were slashed, and staggered to your 
house. But there is only one trail, and yet — 
and yet, how could all that blood come from 
only one person? "Well, the woimded man. 



THE MESSENGER. 97 

let lis say, staggered first to your house and 
then back here, and he wandered off, drunk 
and dying, God knows where. That's my 
theory." 

"A very good one,'* said I cahnly. *'And 
you are going to trail him? '' 

" Yes.** 

"When?'' 

" At once. Will you come? " 

"Not now. I'll gallop over by-and-bye. 
You are going to the edge of the Kerselec for- 
est?" 

"Yes; you will hear us calling. Are you 
coming. Max Fortin? And you, Le Bihan? 
Good; take the dog-cart" 

The big gendarme tramped around the cor- 
ner to the stable and presently returned 
mounted on a strong gray horse; his sabre shone 
on his saddle; his pale yellow and white fac- 
ings were spotless. The little crowd of white- 
coiffed women with their children fell back, as 
Durand touched spurs and clattered away fol- 
lowed by his two troopers. Soon after Le 
Bihan and Max Fortin also departed in the 
mayor's dingy dog-cart. 

" Are you coming? " piped Le Bihan shrilly. 

"In a quarter of an hour," I replied, and 
went back to the house. 

When I opened the door of the morning 
room the death's-head moth was beating its 
strong wings against the window. For a sec- 



98 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

ond I hesitated, then walked over and opened 
the sash. The creature fluttered out, whirred 
over the flower beds a moment, then darted 
across the moorland toward the sea. I called 
the servants together and questioned them. 
Josephine, Catherine, Jean Marie Tregunc, not 
one of them had heard the slightest disturbance 
during the night. Then I told Jean Marie to 
saddle my horse, and while I was speaking Lys 
came down. 

" Dearest,'' I began, going to her. 

"You must tell me everjrthing you know, 
Dick,'' she interrupted, looking me eameetly 
in the face. 

"But there is nothing to tell — only a 
drunken brawl, and some one wounded." 

"And you are going to ride — ^where, 
Dick?" 

" Well, over to the edge of Kerselec forest. 
Durand and the mayor, and Max Fortin, have 
gone on, following a — a trail." 

"What trail?" 

"Some blood." 

" Where did they find it? " 

"Out in the road there." Lys crossed 
herself. 

" Does it come near our house? " 

"Yes." 

"How near?" 

"It comes up to the morning-room win- 
dow," said I, giving in. 



THE MESSENOEB. 



Her hand on my arm grew heavy. "I 
dreamed last night ^^ • 

" So did I '' bnt I thought of the empty 

cartridges in my revolver, and stopped. 

" I dreamed that you were in great danger, 
and I could not move hand or foot to save you; 
but you had your revolver, and I called out to 
you to fire ^^ 

" I did fire! *' I cried excitedly. 

"You— you fired?'' 

I took her in my arms. "My darling,'* I 
said, " something stnmge has happened — some- 
thing that I can not understand as yet. But, 
of course, there is an explanation. Last night 
I thought I fired at the Black Priest." 

" Ah! " gasped Lys. 

" Is that what you dreamed? '* 

"Yes, yes, that was iti I begged you to 
fire '' 

"And I did." 

Her heart was beating against my breast. 
I held her close in silence. 

"Dick," she said at length, "perhaps you 
killed the— the thing." 

"If it was human I did not miss," I an- 
swered grimly. " And it was human," I went 
on, pulling myself together, ashamed of having 
so nearly gone to pieces. "Of course it was 
humanl The whole affair is plain enough. 
Not a drunken brawl, as Durand thinks; it was 
a drunken lout's practical joke, for which he 



100 THE 3£YSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

has suffered. I suppose I must have filled him 
pretty full of bullets, and he has crawled away 
to die in Kerselee forest. It's a terrible affair; 
Fm sorry I fired so hastily; but that idiot Le 
Bihan and Max Fortin have been working on 
my nerves till I am as hysterical as a school- 
girl," I ended angrily. 

" You fired — ^but the window glass was not 
shattered,'' said Lys in a low voice. 

"Well, the window was open, then. And 
as for the — ^the rest — ^I've got nervous indiges- 
tion, and a doctor will settle the Black Priest 
for me, Lys." 

I glanced out of the window at Tregunc 
waiting with my horse at the gate. 

" Dearest, I think I had better go to join 
Durand and the others." 

"I will go too." 

" Oh, no! " 

"Yes, Dick." 
. "Don't, Lys." 

"I shall suffer every moment you are 
away." 

"The ride is too fatiguing, and we can't 
tell what unpleasant sight you may come upon. 
Lys, you don't really think there is anything 
supernatural in this affair? " 

" Dick," she answered gently, " I am a Bre- 
tonne." With both arms around my neck, my 
wife said, "Death is the gift of God. I do 
not fear it when we are together. But alone— 



THE MESSENOEB.: ;;. : Ifltl- 

oh^ my husband^ I shonld fear a God who could 
take you away from me I ^' 

We kissed each other soberly, simply, like 
two children. Then Lys hurried away to 
change heir gown, and I paced up and down the 
garden waiting for her. 

She came, drawing on her slender gaimtlets. 
I swung her into the saddle, gave a hasty order 
to Jean Marie, and mounted. 

Now, to quail imder thoughts of terror on a 
morning Uke this, with Lys in the saddle beside 
me, no matter what had happened or might 
happen, was impossible. Moreover, Mdme 
came sneaking after us. I asked Tregimc to 
catch him, for I was afraid he might be brained 
by our horses^ hoofs if he followed, but the wily 
puppy dodged and bolted after Lys, who was 
trotting along the high-road. " Never mind," 
I thought; " if he's hit he'll live, for he has no 
brains to lose.'' 

Lys was waiting for me in the road beside 
the Shrine of Our Lady of St. Gildas when I 
joined her. She crossed herself, I doffed my 
cap, then we shook out our bridles and galloped 
toward the forest of Kerselec. 

We said very little as we rode. I always 
loved to watch Lys in the saddle. Her ex- 
quisite figure and lovely face were the incar- 
nation of youth and grace; her curling hair 
glistened like threaded gold. 

Out of the comer of my eye I saw the 



-IttSt : .*Pb:mysteby op choice. 

spoiled puppy Mdme come bounding cheerfully 
alongside, oblivious of our horses' heels. Our 
road swung close to the clifiEs. A filthy cormo- 
rant rose from the black rocks and flapped 
heavily across our path. Ly's horse reared, but 
she pulled him down, and pointed at the bird 
with her riding crop. 

" I see,'* said I; " it seems to be going our 
way. Curious to see a cormorant in a forest, 
isn't it?" 

*^ It is a bad sign," said Lys. " You know 
the Morbihan proverb: *When the cormorant 
turns from the sea. Death laughs in the forest, 
and wise woodsmen build boats.' " 

" I wish," said I sincerely, " that there were 
fewer proverbs in Brittany." 

We were in sight of the forest now; across 
the gorse I could see the sparkle of gendarmes' 
trappings, and the glitter of Le Bihan's silver- 
buttoned jacket. The hedge was low and we 
took it without difficulty, and trotted across the 
moor to where Le Bihan and Durand stood ges- 
ticulating. 

They bowed ceremoniously to Lys as we 
rode up. 

^^The trail is horrible — ^it is a river," said 
the mayor in his squeaky voice. "Monsieur 
Barrel, I think perhaps madame would scarcely 
care to come any nearer." 

Lys drew bridle and looked at me. 
. ** It is horrible 1 " said Durand, walking up 



THE MESSENGEB. 103 

beside me; " it looks as though a bleeding regi- 
ment had passed this way. The trail winds and 
winds about there in the thickets; we lose it 
at times, but we always find it again. I can't 
understand how one man — ^no, nor twenty — 
could bleed like that! '' 

A halloo, answered by another, sounded 
from the depths of the forest. 

" It's my men; they are following the trail,'* 
muttered the brigadier. "God alone knows 
what is at the endl " 

" Shall we gallop back, Lys? " I asked. 

" No; let us ride along the western edge of 
the woods and dismount. The sun is so hot 
now, and I should like to rest for a moment," 
she said. 

"The western forest is clear of anything 
disagreeable," said Durand. 

" Very well," I answered; " call me, Le Bi- 
han, if you find anything." 

Lys wheeled her mare, and I followed across 
the springy heather, M6me trotting cheerfully 
in the rear. 

We entered the sunny woods about a quar- 
ter of a kilometre from where we left Durand. I 
took Lys from her horse, flung both bridles over 
a limb, and, giving my wife my arm, aided her 
to a flat mossy rock which overhimg a shallow 
brook gurgling among the beach trees. Lys 
sat down and drew oS her gauntlets. Mdme 
pushed his head into her lap, received an un- 
8 



104 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

deserved caress, and came doubtfully toward 
me. I was weak enough to condone his offence, 
but I made him lie down at my feet, greatly 
to his disgust. 

I rested my head on Lys^s knees, looking up 
at the sky through the crossed branches of the 
trees. 

*' I suppose I have killed him,'' I said. *^ It 
shocks me terribly, Lys.'' 

"You could not have known, dear. He 

may have been a robber, and — ^if — ^not Did 

— have you ever fired your revolver since that 
day four years ago, when the Eed Admiral*s 
son tried to kill you? But I know you have 
not.'' 

"No," said I, wondering. "It's a fact, I 
have not. Why? " 

"And don't you remember that I asked 
you to let me load it for you the day when 
Yves went off, swearing to kill you and his 
father?" 

" Yes, I do remember. Well? " 

" Well, I— I took the cartridges first to St. 
Gildas chapel and dipped them in holy water. 
You must not laugh, Dick," said Lys gently, 
laying her cool hands on my lips. 

" Laugh, my darling! " 

Overhead the October sky was pale ame- 
thyst, and the sunlight burned like orange fiame 
through the yellow leaves of beach and oak. 
Gnats and midges danced and wavered over- 



THE MESSENGER. 105 

head; a spider dropped from a twig halfway 
to the ground and hung suspended on the end 
of his gossamer thread. 

" Are you sleepy, dear? '' asked Lys, bend- 
ing over me. 

'^ I am — ^a little; I scarcely slept two hours 
last night/^ I answered. 

" You may sleep, if you wish,'' said Lys, and 
touched my eyes caressingly. 

*^ Is my head heavy on your knees? '* 

*^ No, Dick.'' 

I was already in a half doze; still I heard the 
brook babbling under the beeches and the hum- 
ming of forest flies overhead. Presently even 
these were stilled. 

The next thing I knew I was sitting bolt 
upright, my ears ringing with a scream, and I 
saw Lys cowering beside me, covering her white 
face with both hands. 

As I sprang to my feet she cried again and 
climg to my knees. I saw my dog rush growl- 
ing into a thicket, then I heard him whimper, 
and he came backing out, whining, ears flat, 
tail down. I stooped and disengaged Lys's 
hand. 

" Don't go, Dick! " she cried. " God, it's 
the Black Priest!" ' 

Li a moment I had leaped across the brook 
and pushed my way into the thicket. It was 
empty. I stared about me; I scanned every 
tree trunk, every bush. Suddenly I saw him. 



106 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

He was seated on a fallen log^ his head resting 
in his hands, his rusty black robe gathered 
around him. For a moment my hair stirred 
under my cap; sweat started on forehead and 
cheek-bone; then I recovered my reason, and 
understood that the man was human and was 
probably wounded to death. Ay, to death; for 
there, at my feet, lay the wet trail of blood, over 
leaves and stones, down into the little hollow, 
across to the figure in black resting silently 
under the trees. 

I saw that he could not escape even if he 
had the strength, for before him, almost at his 
very feet, lay a deep, shining swamp. 

As I stepped forward my foot broke a twig. 
At the sound the figure started a little, then its 
head fell forward again. Its face was masked. 
Walking up to the man, I bade him tell where 
he was wounded. Durand and the others broke 
through the thicket at the same moment and 
hurried to my side. 

" Who are you who hide a masked face in a 
priest^s robe? '' said the gendarme loudly. 

There was no answer. 

" See — see the stiff blood all over his robel ^ 
muttered Le Bihan to Portin. 

" He will not speak,'* said I. 

" He may be too badly wounded,'* whispered 
Le Bihan. 

"I saw him raise his head,'* I said; "my 
wife saw him creep up here/* 



THE MESSENGER. 107 

Durand stepped forward and touched the 
figure. 

" Speak! '* he said. 

*' Speakl ** quavered Fortin. 

Durand waited a moment, then with a sud- 
den upward movement he stripped off the mask 
and threw hack the man^s head. We were look- 
ing into the eye sockets of a skull. Durand 
stood rigid; the mayor shrieked. The skeleton 
burst out from its rotting robes and collapsed 
on the ground before us. From between the 
staring ribs and the grinning teeth spurted a 
torrent of black blood, showering the shrinking 
grasses; then the thing shuddered, and fell over 
into the black ooze of the bog. Little bubbles 
of iridescent air appeared from the mud; the 
bones were slowly engulfed, and, as the last frag- 
ments sank out of sight, up from the depths 
and along the bank crept a creature, shiny, shiv- 
ering, quivering its wings. 

It was a deathVhead moth. 

I wish I had time to tell you how Lys out- 
grew superstitions — for she never knew the 
truth about the affair, and she never will know, 
since she has promised not to read this book. 
I wish I might tell you about the king and his 
coronation, and how the coronation robe fitted. 
I wish that I were able to write how Yvonne 
and Herbert Stuart rode to a boar hunt in 
Quimperl^, and how the hounds raced the 



108 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

quarry right through the town, overturning 
three gendarmes, the notary, and an old woman. 
But I am becoming garrulous, and Lys is call- 
ing me to come and hear the king say that he is 
sleepy. And his Highness shall not be kept 
waiting. 



THE KING'S CRADLE SONG. 

Seal with a seal of gold 

The scroll of a life unrolled ; 
Swathe him deep in his purple stole; 
Ashes of diamonds, crystalled coal. 

Drops of gold in each scents fold. 

Crimson wings of the Little Death, 
Stir his hair with your silken breath ; 
Flaming wings of sins to be, 
Splendid pinions of prophecy. 

Smother his eyes with hues and dyes, 
yiThile the white moon spins and the winds arise. 

And the stars drip through the skies. 

Wave, O wings of the Little Death t 

Seal his sight and stifle his breath, 
Coyer his breast with the gemmed shroud pressed ; 
From north to north, from west to west. 

Wave, O wings of the Little Death ! 
Till the white moon reels in the cracking skies, 

And the ghosts of God arise. 



^ 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 



We are Do other than a moTing row 

Of magic shadow-shapes, that come and go 

Bound with this son-illamined lantern, held 
In midnight by the master of the show. 

A moment's halt — a momentary taste 
Of being from the well amid the waste— 

And lo I the phantom caravan has reached 
The nothing it set out from* Oh, make haste I 

Ah, Love ! could you and I with him conspire 
To grasp this sorry scheme of things entire, 
Would not we shatter it to bits — and then 
Remould it nearer to the heart's desyre t 

Fitzgerald. 
110 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 

Listen, then, love, and with yoor white hand clear 
Yoor forehead from its cloudy hair* 

I. 

^^Thbee great hulking cousins/' said she^ 
closing her gray eyes disdainfully. 

We accepted the rebuke in astonished si- 
lence. Presently she opened her eyes^ and 
seemed surprised to see us there yet. 

** 0/' she said, ** if you think I am going to 
stay here until you make up your minds ^^ 

" Fve made up mine/' said Donald. ** We 
will go to the links. You may come.'' 

"I shall not/' she annoimced. ** Walter, 
what do you propose? " 

Walter looked at his cartridge belt and then 
at the little breech-loader standing in a comer 
of the arbour. 

"Oh, I know/' she said, "but I won't! I 
won't! I won't! " 

The imcles and aunts on the piazza turned 
to look at us; her mother arose from a steamer- 
chair and came across the lawn. 
Ill 



112 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

"WonH what. Sweetheart?'' she asked, 
placing both hands on her daughter's shoulders. 

"Mamma, Walter wants me to shoot, and 
Don wants me to play golf, and I — ^won't! " 

" She doesn't know what she wants," said I. 

"Don't I?" she said, flushing with dis- 
pleasure. 

"Her mother might suggest something," 
hazarded Donald. We looked at our aunt. 

" Sweetheart is spoiled," said that lady de- 
cisively. "If you children don't go away at 
once and have a good time, I shall find employ- 
ment for her." 

" Algebra? " I asked maliciously. 

"How dare youl" cried Sweetheart, sit- 
ting up. " Oh, isn't he mean! isn't he ignoble! 
— and I've done my algebra; haven't I, 
manmia?" 

" But your French? " I began. 

Donald laughed, and so did Walter. As for 
Sweetheart, she arose in all the dignity of six- 
teen years, closed her eyes with superb inso- 
lence, and, clasping her mother's waist with 
one round white arm, marched out of the ar- 
bour. 

" We tease her too much," said Donald. 

"She's growing up fast; we ought not to 
call her ' Sweetheart ' when she puts her hair 
up," added Walter. 

" She's going to put it up in October, when 
she goes back to school," said Donald. " Jack, 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 113 

she will hate you if you keep reminding her of 
her algebra and French/^ 

"Then Til stop/* said I, suddenly con- 
scious what an awful thing it would be if she 
hated me. 

Donald's two pointers came frisking across 
the lawn from the kennels^ and Donald picked 
up his gun. 

"Here we go again/* said I. "Donny^s 
going to the coverts after grouse, Walter's going 
up on the hill with his dust-shot and arsenic, 
and I'm going across the fields after butterflies. 
Why the deuce can't we all go together, just for 
once?" 

" And take Sweetheart ? She would like 
it if we all went together," said Walter; " she 
is tired of seeing Jack net butterflies." 

"Collecting birds and shooting grouse are 
two different things/' began Donald. "You 
spoil my dogs by shooting your confounded 
owls and humming birds." 

" Oh, your precious dogs! " I cried. " Shut 
up, Donny, and give Sweetheart a good day's 
tramp. It's a pity if three cousins can't pool 
their pleasures for once." 

Donald nodded uncertainly. 

" Come on/' said Walter, " we'll find Sweet- 
heart. Jack, you get your butterfly togs and 
come back here." 

I nodded, and watched my two cousins 
saimtering across the lawn — ^big, clean-cut f el- 



114 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

lows, resembling each other enough to be 
brothers instead of cousins. 

We all resembled each other more or less, 
Donald, Walter, and I. As for Sweetheart, 
she looked like none of us. 

It was all very well for her mother to call 
her Sweetheart, and for her aunts to echo it in 
chorus, bi2|; the time was coming when we saw 
we should have to stop. A girl of sixteen with 
such a name is ridiculous, and Sweetheart was 
nearly seventeen; and her hair was " going up •' 
and her gowns were "coming down^* in Oc- 
tober. 

Her own name was pretty enough. I don't 
know that I ought to tell it, but I will: it was 
the same as her mother's. We called her Sweet- 
heart sometimes, sometimes "The Aspen 
Beauty.'' Donald had given her that name 
from a butterfly in my collection, the Vanessa 
Pandora, commonly known as the Aspen 
beauty, from its never having been captured 
in America except in our village of Aspen. 

Here, in the north of New York State, we 
four cousins spent our summers in the family 
house. There was not much to do in Aspen. 
We used the links, we galloped over the sandy 
roads, we also trotted our several hobbies, Don- 
ald, Walter, and I. Sweetheart had no hobby; 
to make up for this, however, she owned a mag- 
nificent team of b§tes-noires — ^Algebra and 
French. 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 115 

As for me, my butterfly collection lan- 
gnished. I had specimens of nearly every but- 
terfly in "New York State, and I rather longed 
for new states to conquer. Anyway, there 
were plenty of Aspen beauties — ^I mean the 
butterflies — ^flying about the roads and balm- 
of-Gilead trees, and perhaps that is why I lin- 
gered there long enough to collect hundreds of 
duplicates for exchange. And j^rhaps it 
wasn^t. 

I thought of these things as I sat in the sun- 
flecked arbour, watching the yellow elm leaves 
flutter down from the branches. I thought, 
too, of Sweetheart, and wondered how she 
would look with her hair up. And while I sat 
there smoking, watching the yellow leaves drift- 
ing across the lawn, a sharp explosion startled 
me and I raised my head. 

Sweetheart was standing on the lawn, gaz- 
ing dreamily at the smoking debris of a large 
flrecracker. 

'' Whaf s that for? '' I asked. 

**It proclaims my independence,^' said 
Sweetheart — " my independence forever. Here- 
after my cousins will ask to accompany me on 
my walks; they need no longer charitably per- 
mit me to accompany them. Are you three 
boys gdng to ride your hobbies? '' 

''We are,'' I said. 

'* Then good-bye. I am going to walk." 

*' Can't we come too? " I asked, laughing. 



116 THE MYSTEEY OF CHOICE. 

" Oh/' she said graciously, " if you put it 
in that way I could not refuse/* 

" May we bring our guns? *' asked Donald 
from the piazza. 

"May I bring my net?'' I added, half 
amused, half annoyed. 

She made a gesture, indifferent, condescend- 
ing. 

" Dear mel " murmured the aunts in chorus 
from the piazza as we trooped after the Aspen 
beauty, " Sweetheart is growing very fast." 

I smiled vaguely at Sweetheart. I was won- 
dering how she would look in long frocks and 
coiled hair. 

n. 

In the fall of the year the meadows of As- 
pen glimmer in the sunlight like crumpled 
sheets of beaten gold; for Aspen is the land of 
golden-rod, of yellow earth and gilded fern. 

There the crisp oaks rustle, every leaf a blot 
of yellow; there the burnished pines sound, 
sound, tremble, and resoimd, like gilt-stringed 
harps aquiver in the wind. 

Sweet fern, sun-dried, bronzed, fills all the 
hills with incense, vague and delicate as the 
white down drifting from the frothy milkweed. 

And where the meadow brook prattled, 
limpid, filtered with sunlight. Sweetheart stood 
knee-deep in fragrant mint, watching the aim- 
less minnows swimming in circles. On a dis- 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 117 

tant hill^ dark against the blne^ Donald moved 
with his dogs, and I saw the snn-glint on his 
gun, and I heard the distant "Hi — on! Hi — 
onl^* long after he disappeared below the 
brown hill's brow. 

Walter, too, had gone, leaving ns there 
by the brook together. Sweetheart and I; and 
I saw the crows flapping and circling far over 
the woods, and I heard the soft report of his 
dust-shot shells among the trees. 

"The ruling passion. Sweetheart,*' I said. 
"Donny chases the phantom of pleasure with 
his dogs. The phantom flies from Walter, and 
he follows with his dust-shot.'' 

"Then," said Sweetheart, "follow your 
phantom also; there are butterflies every 
where." She raised both arms and turned 
from the brook. "Everywhere flying I see 
butterflies — ^phantoms of pleasure; and. Jack, 
you do not follow with your net." 

" No," said I, " the world to-day is too fair 
to-^ay in. I even doubt that the happiness 
of empires hinges on the discovery of a new spe- 
cies of anything. Do I bore you? " 

"A little," said Sweetheart, touching the 
powdered gold of the blossoms about her. She 
laid the tip of her third finger on her lips and 
then on the golden-rod. " I shall not pick it; 
the world is too fair to-day," she said. " What 
are you going to do. Jack? " 

^ I could doze," I said- '^ Could you?" 



«i 



118 THE MYSTBKY OF CHOICE. 

*^ Yes — ^if you told me stories/* 

I contemplated her in silence for a moment. 
After a while she sat down under an oak and 
clasped her hands. 

" I am growing so old/' she sighed, " I no 
longer take pleasure in childish things — ^Don- 
ald's dogs, Walter's himmung birds, your but- 
tcrffies. Jack?" 

*^What?" 

*^ Sit down on the grass." 

^* What for?" 

" Because I ask you." 

I sat down. 

Presently she said: ^^ I am as tall as mamma* 
Why should I study algebra? " 

" Because," I answered evasively. 

" Your answer is as rude as though I were 
twenty, instead of sixteen," said Sweetheart. 
" If you treat me as a child from this moment, I 
shall hate you." 

''Me— Sweetheart?" 

''And that name! — ^it is good for children 
and kittens." 

I looked at her seriously. " It is good for 
women, too — ^when it 'is time," I said. "I 
prophesy that one day you will hear it again. 
As for me, I shall not call you by that name if 
you dislike it." 

" I am a woman — ^now," she said. 

"Oh! at sixteen." 

" To-morrow I am to be seventeen." 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 119 

Presently, looking o£E at the blue hills, I 
said: ^* For a long time I have recognised that 
that subtle, indefinable attitude — ^we call it 
deference — due from men to women is due 
from us to you. Donny and Walter are slower 
to accept this. You know what you have been 
to us as a child; we can't bear to lose you — ^to 
meet you in another way — ^to reckon with you 
as we reckon with a woman. But it is true: 
our little Sweetheart has vanished, and — you 
are here! '^ 

The oak leaves began to rustle in the hill 
winds; the crows cawed from the woods. 

*^ Oui c'est moi,'* she said at length. 

" I shall never call you Sweetheart again,'* 
I said, smiling. 

**Who knows?'' she laughed, and leaned 
over to pick a blade of wild wheat. She col- 
oured faintly a moment later, and said: "I 
didn't mean that. Jack." 

And so Sweetheart took her first step across 
that threshold of mystery, the Temple of Idols. 
And of the gilded idols within the temple, one 
shall turn to living flesh at the soimd of a voice. 
And lo! where a child had entered, a woman 
returned with the key to the Temple of Gilded 
Idols. 

"Jack," said Sweetheart, "you are wrong. 
No day is too fair to kill in. I shall pick my 
arms full — ^full of flowers." 

Over the yellow fields, red with the stalks 
9 



120 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

of the buckwheat, crowned with a glimmering 
cloud of the dusty gold of the golden-rod. 
Sweetheart passed, pensive, sedate, awed by the 
burden of sixteen years. 

I followed. 

Over the curling fern and wind-stirred 
grasses the silken milkweed seeds sailed, sailed, 
and the great red-brown butterflies drifted 
above, ruddy as autumn leaves aglow in the sun. 

On the sand-cliff there are marigolds,** said 
Sweetheart. 

I looked at the mass of wild flowers in her 
arms; her white polished skin reflected the 
blaze of colour, warming like ivory imder their 
glow. 

'Marigolds,*' I repeated; "we will get 



<«i 



"The sand slides on the face of the cliff; 
you must be careful,** she said. 

" And I may see one of those rare cliff but- 
terflies. I haven*t any good examples.** 

I fancy she was not listening; the crows 
were clamouring above the beech woods; the 
hill winds filled our ears with a sound like the 
sound of the sea on shoals. Her gray eyes, 
touched with the sky*s deep blue and the blue 
of the misty hills, looked out across the miles of 
woods and fields, and saw a world; not a world 
old, scarred, rock-ribbed, and salt with tears, 
but a new world, youthful, ripe, sunny, hazy 
with the splendour of wonders hidden behind 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 121 

the horizon — ^a world jewelled with gems, 
spanned by rose-mist rainbows — ^a world of six- 
teen years. 

"We are already at the clifPs edge/* I 
said. 

She stepped to the edge and looked over. I 
drew her back. The sand started among the 
rocks, running, running with a sound like 
silver water. 

" Then you shall not go either,'* she said. 
^ do not care for marigolds.** 

But I was already on the edge, stooping for 
a blossom. The next instant I fell. 

There was a whistle of sand, a flurry and a 
rush of wind, a blur of rock, fern, dead grasses 
— ^a cry! 

For I remember as I fell, falling I called, 
" Sweetheart 1 ** and again "Sweetheart!** 
Then my body struck the rocks below. 

ni. 

Of all the seconds that tick the whole year 
through, of all the seconds that have slipped on- 
ward marking the beat of time since time was 
loosed, there is one, one brief moment, steeped 
in magic and heavy with oblivion, that some- 
times lingers in the soul of man, annihilating 
space and time. If, at the feet of God, a year 
is a second passed unnoted, this magic second, 
afloat on the tide of time, moves on and on till. 



122 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

caught in the vortex of some life's whirl, it sinks 
into the soul of a being near to death. 

And in that soul the magic second glows 
and lingers, stretching into minutes, hours, 
days — ^aye, days and days, till, if the magic 
hold, the calm years crowd on one by one; and 
yet it all is but a second — ^that magic moment 
that comes on the tide of time — ^that came to me 
and was caught up in my life's whirl as I fell, 
dropping there between sky and earth. . 

And so that magic moment grew to minutes, 
to hours; and when my body, whirling, pitch- 
ing, struck and lay flung out on the earth, the 
magic second grew until the crystal days fell 
from my life, as beads, one by one, fall from the 
rosaries that saints tell kneeling. 

Those days of a life that I have lived, those 
years that linger still aglow in the sun behind 
me, dim yet splendid as dust-dimmed jewels, 
they also have ended, not in vague night, but in 
the sunburst of another second — such a second 
as ticks from my watch as I write, quick, sharp, 
joyous, irrevocable! So, of that magic second, 
or day, or year, I shall tell — ^I, as I was, stand- 
ing beside my body flxmg there across the earth. 

I looked at my body, Ijdng in a heap, then 
turned to the sand cliff smiling. 

"Sweetheart!'' I called. 

But she was abeady at my side. 

We walked on through fragrant pastures, 
watching the long shadows stretch from field 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 123 

to fields speaking of what had been and of all 
that was to be. It was so simple — everything 
was clear before us. Had there been doubts^ 
fears, sudden alarms, startled heartbeats? 

If there had been, now they were ended for- 
ever. 

^^ITot forever,^^ said Sweetheart; "who 
knows how long the magic second may last? ^* 

" But we — ^what difference can that make? ** 
I asked. 

«Tous?^* 

«Yes.^* 

"None,^' said Sweetheart decisively. 

We looked out into the west. The sim 
turned to a mound of cinders; the hills loomed 
in opalescent steam. 

"But — ^but — ^your shadow! ^^ said Sweet- 
heart. 

I bent my head, thrilled with happiness. 

"And yours," I whispered. 

The shadows we cast were whiter than snow. 

I still heard the hill winds, soft in my ears 
as breaking surf; a bird-note came from the 
dusky woodland; a star broke out overhead. 

" What is your pleasure. Sweetheart, now all 
is said?*^ I asked. 

" The world is all so fair,^* she sighed; " is 
it fairer beyond the hills, Jack? " 

" It is fair where you pass by, north, south, 
and from west to west again. In France the 
poplars are as yellow as our oak^. In Morbi- 



124 THE MYSTEKY OP CHOICE. 

han the gorse gilds all the hills, yellow as 
golden-rod. Shall we go?^^ 

"But in the spring — ^let us wait until 
spring.^^ 

" Where? ^^ 

"Here.^^ 

" Until spring? '' 

"It is written that Time shall pass as a 
shadow across the sea. What is that book there 
under your feet — ^that iron-bound book, half 
embedded like a stone in the grass.*' 

" I did not see it! '' 

" Bring it to me.*' 

I raised the book; it left a bare mark in the 
sod as a stone that is turned. Then, holding it 
on my knees, I opened it, and Sweetheart, lean- 
ing on my shoulder, read. The tall stars flared 
like candles, flooding the page with diamond 
light; the earth, perfumed with blossoms, 
stirred with the vague vibration of countless 
souiids, tiny voices swaying breathless in the 
hidden surge of an endless harmony. 

"The white shadow is the shadow of the 
soul,** she read. Even the winds were hushed 
as her sweet lips moved. 

" And what shall make thee to understand 
what hell is? . . . When the sun shall be folded 
up as a garment that is laid away; when the 
stars fall, and th6 seas boil, and when souls shall 
be joined again to their bodies; and when the 
girl who hath been buried alive shall be asked 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 125 

for what crime; when books shall be laid open^ 
when hell shall bum fiercely, and when para- 
dise shall be brought very near: 

"Every soul shall know what it hath 
wrought I '* 

I closed my eyes; the splendour of the star- 
light on the page was more than my eyes could 
bear. 

But she read on; for what can dim her eyes? 

"0 man, verily, labouring, thou labourest 
to meet thy Lobd. 

" And thou shalt meet HimI '' 

"When the earth shall be stretched like a 
skin, and shall cast forth that which is therein; 

" By the heaven adorned with signs, by the 
witness and the witnessed; 

" By that which appeareth by night; by the 
daybreak and the ten nights — ^the ten nights; 

"The night of Al Kadr is better than a 
thousand months. 

" Praise be to God, the Lord of all creatures; 
the Most Merciful, the King of the Day of 
Judgment. Thee do we worship, and of thee 
•do we beg. assistance. Direct us in the right 
way, in the way of those to whom thou hast 
been gracious; not of those against whom thou 
art incensed, nor of those who go astrayl '^ 

In the sudden silence that spread across 
earth and heaven I heard the sound of a voice 
under the earth, calling, calling, calling. 



126 "l^HE MYSTEBY OP CHOICE. 

'* It is already spring/* said Sweetheart; and 
she rose^ placing her white hands in mine. 
'^ Shall we go?'' 

" But we are already there/' I stammered^ 
turning my eyes fearfully; for the tall pines 
dwindled and clustered and rose again cool 
and gray in the morning air^ all turned to stone^ 
fretted and carved like lacework; and where 
the pines had faded, the twin towers of a cathe- 
dral loomed; and where the hills swept across 
the horizon, the roofs of a white city glim- 
mered in the morning sun. Bridges and 
quays and streets and domes and the hum of 
traffic and rattle of arms; and over all, the 
veil of haze and the twin gray towers of Notre 
Damel 

"Sweetheart!" I faltered. 

But we were already in my studio. 



IV. 

The studio had not changed. The sun 
flooded it. 

Sweetheart sat in the broken armchair and 
watched me struggle with the packing. Every 
now and then she made an impulsive movement 
toward the heap of clothes on the floor, which 
I checked with a ** Thanks! I can fix it all alone. 
Sweetheart." 

Clifford seemed to extract amusement from 
it all, and said as much to Bowden, who was as 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 127 

usual mining my zitherine by trying to play it 
like a banjo. 

Elliott^ knowing he could be of no use to 
us, had the decency to sit outside the studio 
on one of the garden benches. He appeared 
at intervals at the studio door, saying, " Come 
along, Clifford; they don^t want you messing 
about. Drop that buijo, Eowden, or Jack will 
break your head with it — ^won't you. Jack? '* 

I said I would, but not with the zitherine. 

Clifford flatly refused to move unless Sweet- 
heart would take him out into our garden and 
show him the solitary goldfish which lurked 
in the fountain under the almond trees. But 
Sweetheart, apparently fascinated by the mys- 
teries of packing, turned a deaf ear to Clifford's 
blandishments and Bowden's discords. 

" I imagined,'^ said Clifford, somewhat hurt, 
** that you would delight in taking upon your- 
self the duties of a hostess. I should be pleased 
to believe that I am not an unwelcome guest.'* 

"So should I,'* echoed Eowden; "I'd be 
pleased too.'' 

"What a shame for you to bother, Jack! 
she said. " Mr. Clifford shall go and make some 
tea directly. Mr. Eowden, you may take a 
table out by the fountain — ^and stay there." 

Clifford, motioning Elliott to take the other 
end of the Japanese table, backed with it 
through the hallway and out to the gravel walk, 
expostulating. 



128 THE MYSTEKY OP CHOICE. 

" The sugar is there in that tin box by the 
model stand/* she said, when he reappeared, 
*^ and the extra spoons are lying in a long box 
on Jack^s big easel/' 

When Eowden, reluctantly relinquishing 
the zitherine, followed Clifford, bearing the 
cups and alcohol lamp, I raised my head and 
wiped the dust from my forehead. I believe I 
swore a little in French. Sweetheart looked 
startled. She knew more French than I sup- 
posed she did. 

"What is it, Jack?*' 

" Mais — ^rien, ga m'embSte — cette espSce de 
malle '' 

"Then why won't you let me help you. 
Jack? I can at least put in my gowns.'' 

" But I must pack my colour box first, and 
the gun case, and the box of reels, and the pas- 
tel case, and our shooting boots, and the water- 
colour box, and the cartridge belt, and your 
golf shoes, and ^" 

" dearl " said Sweetheart with a shudder. 

I stood up and scowled at the tnmk. 

" To look at you. Jack," murmured Sweet- 
heart, " one might think you unhappy." 

IJnhappyl At the thought our eyes met 
across the table. 

" Unhappy! " I whispered. 

Then Clifford came stumbling in, wearing 
a pair of Joseph's sabots, and, imitating that 
faithful domestic in voice and manner, in- 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 129 

vited US to tea imder the lilacs and almond 
blossoms. 

"In a moment/*- cried Sweetheart impa- 
tiently. " Go and pour the tea.** 

CliflEord looked aghast. "No, nol** he 
cried; "it*s impossible — I won*t believe that 
you two are deliberately getting rid of me so 
you can be alone to spoon 1 And your honey- 
moon already a year old, and ^** 

Sweetheart frowned, and tapped her foot. 

Clifford retired indignant. 

Then she raised her eyes to mine, and a deli- 
cate colour stained her cheeks and neck. 

" Yes,** I said, "we have been married nearly 
a year. Sweetheart.** 

We looked at our white shadows on the 
floor. 

V. 

Sweetheart sat under the lilac blossoms 
pouring out tea for Clifford, Elliott, and Row- 
den. She was gracious to Clifford, gentle to 
Elliott, and she took Eowden under her wing 
in the sweetest way possible, to which Clifford 
stated his objections. 

'* Mr. Eowden is younger than you are,** she 
said gravely. "Monsieur Clifford, I do not 
wish you to torment him.** 

" Eowden*s no baby; he*s as old as Jack is, 
and Jack doesn*t murder music.** 

" I am glad to see you acknowledge Jack*s 



130 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

superiority in all matters/^ said Sweetheart 
with a dangerous smile. 

"I donV' cried Clifford laughing; "and 
I don^t see what you find to care about in a 
man who clips his hair like a gendarme and 
paints everything purple.'* 

"Everything is purple — ^if Jack paints it 
so/* said Sweetheart, smiling at her reflected 
face in the water. She stood at the rim of the 
little stone foimtain with her hands clasped 
behind her back. Elliott and Clifford were 
poking about in the water plants to dis- 
lodge the solitary goldfish, while Bowden 
gathered dewy clusters of lilacs as an offer- 
ing. 

" There he goes! " said Elliott. 

" Poor fellow, living there all alone! ** said 
Sweetheart. "Jack must leave word with 
Joseph to get him a little lady fish to pay his 
court to.** 

"Better put in another gentleman fish, 
then, if you*re following Nature,** said Clifford, 
with an attempt at cynicism which drew the 
merriest laugh from Sweetheart. 

** Oh, how funny is Monsieur Clifford when 
he wants to be like Frenchmen!** she mur- 
mured. 

"Jack,** said Elliott, as I came from the 
studio and picked up a cup of tea grown cold, 
" Clifford*s doing the world-worn disenchanted 
rou6.** 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 131 

" And — ^and I fear he will next make love 
to mel ^' cried Sweetheart. 

"You'd better look out. Jack/' said Clif- 
ford darkly, and pretended to sulk until Sweet- 
heart sent him off to buy the bonbons she would 
need for the train. 

" They're packed/* I said, " every trunk of 
them!'' 

Sweetheart was enchanted. "All my new 
gowns, and the shoes from Eix's — Jack, you 
didn't forget the shoes — ^and the bath robes— 
and '' 

"All packed," I said, swallowing the tea 
with a wry face. 

" Oh," she cried reproachfully, "don't drink 
that! Here, I will have some hot tea in a mo- 
ment," and she ran over and perched on the 
arm of the garden bench while I lighted the 
alcohol lamp and then a cigarette. 

Eowden came up with his offering of lilacs, 
and she decorated each of us with a spray. 

It was growing late. The long shadows fell 
across the gravel walks and flecked the white 
walls of the sculptor's studio opposite. 

"It's the nine-o'clock train, isn't it?" said 
EUiott. 

" We will meet you at the station at eight- 
thirty," added Eowden. 

"You don't mind, do you, our dining 
alone?" said Sweetheart shyly; "it's our last 
day — Jack's and mine — ^in the old studio." 



132 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

''Not the last, I hope/' said Elliott sin- 
cerely. 

We all sat silent for a moment. 

"0 Paris, Paris — ^how I fear it!'' mur- 
mured Sweetheari; to me; and in the same 
breath, " No, no, we must love it, you and I.'* 

Then Elliott said aloud, "I suppose you 
have no idea when you will return? '* 

" No,'^ I replied, thinking of the magic sec- 
ond that had become a year. 

And so we dined alone. Sweetheart and I, 
in the old studio. 

At half -past eight o'clock the cab stood at 
the gate with all our traps piled on top, and 
Joseph and his wife and the two brats were cry- 
ing, " Au revoir, madamel au revoir, monsieur! 
We will keep the studio well dusted. Bon voy- 
agel bon voyage! '^ and all of a sudden my arm 
was caught by Sweetheart's little gloved hand, 
and she drew me back through the long ivy- 
covered alley to the garden where the studio 
stood, its doorway closed and silent, the hollow 
windows black and grim. Truly the light 
had passed away with the passing of Sweet- 
heart. Her hand slipped from my arm, and 
she went and knelt down at the threshold and 
kissed it. 

" I first knew happiness when I first crossed 
it,'' she said; "it breaks my heart to leave it. 
Only that magic second! Mt it seems years 
that we have lived here." 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 133 

" It was you who brought happiness to it/* 
I said. 

"Good-byel good-bye, dear, dear, old stu- 
dio!*' she cried. "Oh, if Jack is always the 
same to me as he has been here — ^if he will be 
faithful and true in that new home! ** 

The new home was to be in a strange land. 
Sweetheart was a little frightened, but was 
dying to go there. Sweetheaxt had never seen 
the golden gorse ablaze on the moors of Morbi- 
han. 

VI. 

I went inside the brass railing and waited my 
turn to buy the tickets. When it came, I took 
two first class to Quimperl6, for it was to be an 
all-night ride, and there was no sleeping car. 
Clifford had taken charge of the baggage, and 
I went with him to have it registered, leaving 
Sweetheart with Elliott and Rowden. All the 
traps were there — ^the big trunks, the big va- 
lises, my sketching kit, the zitherine in a 
leather case, two handbags, a bundle of um- 
brellas and canes, and a huge package of 
canvases. The toilet case and the rugs and 
waterproofs we took with us into the compart- 
ment. 

The compartment was empty. Sweetheart 
nestled into one comer, and when I had placed 
our traps in the racks overhead I sat down op- 
posite, while Clifford handed in our sandwiches. 



134 THE MYSTEBY OP CHOICE. 

a bottle of red wine^ and Sweetheart's box of 
bonbons. 

We didn't say mnch; most had been said be- 
fore starting. Clifford was more affected than 
he eared to show — ^I know by the way he 
grasped my hand. They are dear fellows, every 
one. We did not realize that we were actually 
going — going, perhaps, forever. She laughed, 
and chatted, and made fun of Clifford, and 
teased Bowden, aided and abetted by Elliott, 
imtil the starting gong clanged and a warning 
whistle sounded along the gaslit platform. 

^^ Jac V cried Clifford, leaning in the win- 
dow, " God bless you! God bless you both! '' 

Elliott touched her hand and wrung mine, 
and Bowden risked his neck to give us both 
one last cordial grasp. 

"Coimt on me — on us,'' cried Clifford, 
speaking in English, ^^ if you are — ^troubled! " 

By what, my poor Clifford? Can you, with 
all your gay courage, turn back the hands of the 
dials? Can you, with all your warm devotion, 
add one second to the magic second and make 
it two? The shadows we cast are white. 

The train stole out into the night, and I 
saw them grouped on the platform, silhouettes 
in the glare of the yellow signals. I drew in 
my head and shut the window. Sweetheart's 
face had grown very serious, but now she smiled 
across from her comer. 

** Aren't you coming over by me. Jack? " 



THE WHITE SHADOW. I35 

VII. 

We must have been moving very swiftly, for 
the car rocked and trembled, and it was prob- 
ably that which awoke me. I looked across at 
Sweetheart. She was lying on her side, one 
cheek resting on her gloved hand, her travelling 
cap pushed back, her eyes shut. I smoothed 
away the curly strands of hair which straggled 
across her cheeks, and tucked another rug well 
about her feet. Her feet were small as a child's. 
I speak as if she were not a child. She was 
eighteen then. 

The next time I awoke we lay in a long 
gaslit station. Some soldiers were disembark- 
ing from the forward carriages, and a gendarme 
stalked up and down the platform. 

I looked sleepily about for the name of the 
station. It was painted in blue over the buffet — 
"Petit St. Yves.'' "Is it possible we are in 
Brittany?'' I thought. Then the voices of 
the station hands, who were hoisting a small 
boat upon the forward carriage, settled my 
doubts. " Aliens! tire hardiment, Jean Louis! 
mets le cannotte deboutte." 

ArrSte toi Yves! doucementi doucementl 
Sacr6 garce! " 

Somewhere in the darkness a mellow bell 
tolled. I settled back to slumber, my eyes on 
Sweetheart. 

She slept. 
10 



136 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 



VIII. 

I awoke in a flood of brightest sunshine. 
Prom our window I could look into the centre 
of a most enchanting little town, all built of 
white limestone and granite. The June sunshine 
slanted on thatched roof and painted gable, and 
fairly blazed on the little river slippingby under 
the stone bridge in the square. 

The streets and the square were alive 
with rosy-faced women in white head-dresses. 
Everywhere the constant motion of blue skiri;s 
and spotless coiffes, the twinkle of varnished 
socks, the clump! clump! of sabots. 

like a black shadow a priest stole across the 
square. Above him the cross on the church 
glowed like a live cinder, flashing its reflection 
along the purple-slated roof from the eaves 
of which a cloud of ash-gray pigeons drifted 
into the gutter below. I turned from the win- 
dow to encounter Sweetheart^s eyes. Her lips 
moved a little, her long lashes heavy with 
slumber drooped lower, then with a little sigh 
she sat bolt upright. When I laughed, as I 
always did, she smiled, a little confused, a little 
ashamed, murmuring: "Bon jour, mon ch6ri! 
Quelle heure est-il? ^^ That was always the way 
Sweetheart awoke. 

"0 dear, I am so rumpled!** she said. 
"Jack, get me the satchel this minute, and 
don't look at me until I ask you to.** 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 137 

I unlocked the satchel, and then turning to 
the window again threw it wide open. Oh, 
how sweet came the morning air from the 
meadows I Some young fellows below on the 
bank of the stream were poking long cane fish- 
ing-rods imder the arches of the bridge. 

" Sweetheart,^* I said over my shoulder, " I 
believe there are trout in this stream.'* 

'^Mr. Elliott says that whenever you see a 
puddle you always say that,** she replied. 

"What does he know about it?** I an- 
swered, " for I am touchy on the subject; " he 
doesn't know a catfish from a — ^a dogfish.** 

" Neither do I, Jack dear, but I*m going to 
learn. Don*t be cross.** 

She had finished her toilet and came over to 
the window, leaning out over my shoulder. 

"Where are we?** she cried in startled 
wonder at the little white town and the acres 
of swaying clover. " Oh, Jack, is — ^is this the 
country? ** 

A man in uniform passing under our win- 
dow looked up surprised. 

" What are you doing here? ** he demanded; 
then, seeing Sweetheart, he took off his gold- 
laced cap, and added, with a bow: " This car- 
riage goes no farther, monsieur — ^madame ^** 

"Merci!** exclaimed Sweetheart, "we wish 
to go to Quimperl6I ** 

" And we have tickets for Quimperl6,** I in- 
sisted. 



188 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

"But/* smiled the official, "this is Quim- 
perle/* 

It was true. There was the name written 
over the end of the station; and, looking ahead, 
I saw that our car had been detached and was 
standing in stately seclusion under the freight 
shed. How long it had been standing so 
Heaven alone knows; but they evidently had 
neglected to call us, and there we were inhabit- 
ing a detached carriage in the heart of Quim- 
perl6. I managed to get a couple of porters, 
and presently we found all our traps piled up 
on the platform, and a lumbering vehicle with 
a Breton driver waiting to convey us to the 
hotel. 

"Which,** said I to the docile Breton, "is 
the best hotel in Quimperl6? ** 

" The H6tel lion d*Or,** he replied. 

*^ How do you know? ** I demanded. 

'' iiccauiie/' said he mildly, " it is the only 
hotel m Qnimperl^/' 

Sweetheart observed that this ought to be 
convincing, even to me, and she tormented me 
all the way to the squarej where I got even by 
pretending to be horrified at her dishevelled 
co?i<Hticm incident to a night's railway ride in 
a stuffy compartment* 

Don^tj Jackt people will look at us.*' 

•* JM *em." 

^Tlli. this is cruel! Oh, 1*11 pay you for 




THE WHITE SHADOW. 139 

And they did look at us — or rather at her; 
for from the time Sweetheart and I had 
cast our lots together, I noticed that I seemed 
to escape the observation of passers-by. When 
I lived alone in Paris I attracted a fair share of 
observation from the world as it wagged on its 
Parisian way. It was pleasant to meet a pretty 
girFs eyes now and then in the throng which 
flowed through the park and boxdevard. I 
really never flattered myself that it was because 
of my personal beauty; but in Paris, any young 
fellow who is dressed in the manner of Albion, 
hatted and gloved in the same style, is not en- 
tirely a cipher. But now it was not the same, 
by a long shot. 

Sweetheart's beauty simply put me in my 
place as an unnoticed but perhaps correct sup- 
plement to her. 

She knew she was a beauty, and was de- 
lighted when she looked into her mirror. 
Nothing escaped her. The soft hair threaded 
with sunshine, which, when loosened, curled to 
her knees; the clear white forehead and straight 
brows; the nose delicate and a trifle upturned; 
the scarlet lips and flne cut chin — she knew the 
value of each of these. She was pleased with 
the soft, full curve of her throat, the little ears, 
and the colour which came and went in her 
cheeks. 

But her eyes were the first thing one no- 
ticed. They were the most beautiful gray eyes 



140 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

that ever opened under silken lashes. She ap- 
proved of my telling her this, which duty I ful- 
filled daily. Perhaps it may be superfluous to 
say that we were very much in love. Did I 
say were? 

I think that, as I am chanting the graces of 
Sweetheart, it might not be amiss to say that 
she is just an inch shorter than I am, and that 
no Parisienne carried a pretty gown with more 
perfection than she did. I have seen gowns 
that looked like the devil on the manikin, but 
when Sweetheart wore them they were the as- 
tonishment and admiration of myself. And I 
do know when a woman is weli^eSsed, though 
I am an art critic. 

Sweetheart regarded her beauty as an inti- 
mate affair between ourselves, a precious gift 
for our mutual benefit, to be carefully treasured 
and petted. Her attitude toward the world 
was immistakable. The world might look — 
she was indifferent. With our intimate friends 
she was above being flattered. Clifford said to 
me once: " She carries her beauty as a princess 
would carry the Koh-i-noor — she knows she is 
worthy of it, and hopes it is worthy of her. 

" We ought to be so happy that I am beauti- 
ful! '^ she would say to me. " Just think, sup- 
posing I were not! ^' 

I used to try to make her believe that it 
would have made no difference. 

" Oh, not now,'' she would say gravely. " I 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 141 

know that if I lost it it woiild be the same to 
us both, now; but you can't make me beKeve 
that, at first, when you used to lean over the 
terrace of the Luxembourg and wait patiently 
for hours just to see me walk out of the Odeon." 

** I didn't,'^ I woxdd always explain; " I was 
there by accident/' 

^*0h, what a funny accident to happen 
every day for two months! '' 

^^Stop teasingi Of course, after the first 
week ^^ 

** And what a funny accident that I should 
pass the same way every day for two months, 
when before I always went by the Eue de 
Seinel'^ 

There was once such an accident, and such 
a girl. I never knew her; she is dead. I won- 
dered sometimes that Sweetheart knew, and 
believed it was she herself. Yet the other 
woman's shadow was black. 

Sweetheart had a most peculiar and un- 
worldly habit of not embellishing facts. She 
presently displayed it when we arrived at the 
Hotel lion d'Or. 

"Jack,'' said she nervously, "the cinders 
have made your face unpleasant. I am ashamed. 
They may not believe you are my husband." 

"As monsieur and madame," I said, "we 
may have dirty faces and be honest." 

" Do you suppose they — they will believe it? 
These queer people ^" 



143 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

" They'd better! '' I said fiercely. 

"I — ^I hadn't thought of that/' she said. 
'^ You see, in our own little place in Paris every- 
body knew it, but here ^" 

I said, " Dearest, what nonsense! " and we 
marched unceremoniously up to the register, 
where I wrote our names. Then, with a hasty 
little squeeze of her gloved hand, she turned to 
the maid and tripped oflE to inspect our quarters. 
While I was pumping the fat-headed old pro- 
prietor about the trout fishing in the vicinity, 
the maid returned with the request that I 
mount to the room above. I followed her along 
the tiled passages and found Sweetheart sitting 
on a trunk. 

^^It's charming! charming!" she said. 
** Just look at the roses outside, and the square, 
and the river! and oh. Jack, the funny little 
Breton cattle, and the old man with knee- 
breeches! It's charming! and" — here she 
caught sight of the enraptured and fascinated 
maid — " and you are charming, with your red 
cheeks and white coifle," she said. " Oh, how 
pretty!" 

' " Oh, madame! " murmured the servant in 
dire confusion. 

I said, "Dearest, that will do. Nobody 
speaks of my peculiar charms, and I wish to be 
noticed." 

The presence of the maid prevented Sweet- 
heart from making amends, so we told her we 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 143 

were satisfied, and we would spare her life if 
she prepared breakfast in seventeen seconds. 

She accepted the gift of existence with a 
dazed conrtsey, and vanished. 

It was refreshing to get hold of a sponge 
and cold water after fourteen hours in a cramped 
compartment. Hunger drove us to hurry — a 
thing we rarely did in the morning — and the 
way we splashed cold water about would have 
been fatal to any but a tiled floor. 

" Dear/^ I said, ^* you have not yet seen me 
in my Tyrolese knickerbockers and beautiful 
shooting jacket. You have never beheld my 
legs clothed in Tyrolese stockings, at twenty 
francs a pair.^' 

^* The legs? ^* she inquired from the depths 
of a bath robe. 

I ignored the question, and parted my hair 
with care. Then I sat down on the window 
and whistled. 

Of course I was ready first. Sweetheart's 
hair had got into a tangle and needed to be all 
combed out. 

*^0h, I know you are impatient, because 
you're whistling the Chant du Depart,'' she said 
from the door of her toilet room. 

" As usuaV I said, " I am ready first.'' 

" If you say that again ^" she threatened. 

I said it, and dodged a sponge. Presently I 
was requested to open the trunk and select a 
gown for her. Dear little Sweetheart! she 



144 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

loved to pretend that she had so many it needed 
long consxdtation to decide which, 

" The dark blue? '' I inquired. 

" Don^t you think it is too warm? ^' 

"The pale blue, then — or the pink and 
white? ^' 

"Why not the white, with the cuffs k 
TAnglaise, and the canoe hat? '^ 

I hauled it out. 

Then, of course, she changed her mind. 

" I think the gray is better for the morning; 
then I can wear the big chip hat.^' 

I fished up the gray. It was light, almost 
silvery, and had white spots on it. 

" Jack, dear,^^ she said, coming out with her 
hair tucked up in a knot, drawing the bath robe 
up to her chin with both hands, " I think that 
the white cloth woxdd be better, and that I 
can wear the b6ret." 

By this time the trunk was in a pretty mess, 
which amused her; but at last I ferreted out 
the white cloth dress, and, refusing to listen to 
further discussion, sat down on the window 
seat. Sweetheart enjoyed it. 

"Stop telling me to hurry,*' she said; "I 
can't, if you keep saying it all the time.'' 

After a while she called me to fasten her 
corsage, which hooked with about ten himdred 
hooks along the side and collar. I hated to do 
it, and my finger ends stimg for hours after, 
but, as Sweetheart very rightly says, " When we 



THE WHITE SHADOW. I45 

are rich enough to have a maid you neednH/' I 
submitted with an air which delighted her. 
Her tormenting "Thank you, Jack/^ was the 
last straw, so I calmly picked her up and car- 
ried her out, and almost to the dining room, 
where I set her down just in time to avoid the 
proprietor and three domestics issuing from the 
office. 

Sweetheart was half inclined to laugh, half 
indignant, and wholly scandalized. But she 
did not dare say anjrthing, for we were at the 
dining-room door. 

There were some people there, but except 
for a slight inclination we did not notice each 
other. We had a small table to ourselves by 
the rose-bowered window. 

We were very hungry. Breakfast began 
with fresh sardines just caught, and ended with 
little Breton cakes and a demi-tasse. I finished 
first; I always do, because the wretched habit 
of bolting my food, contracted while studying 
under Bouguereau at Julian's, clings to me yet. 
Oh, I shall have a merry time paying for it when 
I am fortyl I began, as usual, to tease Sweet- 
heart. 

" If you continue to eat like this, dear, you 
will never be able to wear your new frocks. 
This one seems a trifle too tight now.*' 

Sweetheart, who prided herself as much on 
Jier figure as on her lovely face, repelled the 
insult with disdain and nibbled her Breton bis- 



146 THE MYSTEBY OP CHOICE. 

cuit defiantly. When at last she condescended 
to rise, we strolled out under the trees in front 
of the hotel, and sat down on the low stone wall 
surrounding the garden. The noon sun hung 
in the zenith, flooding the town with a dazzling 
downpour. Sunbeams glanced and danced on 
the water; sunbeams filtered through the foli- 
age; sunbeams stole under Sweetheart^s big 
straw hat, searching the depths of the gray eyes. 
Sunbeams played merry mischief with my ears 
and neck, which were beginning to sting in the 
first sunburn of the year. Through the square 
the white-cqiflfed women passed and repassed; 
small urchins with silver-buckled hatbands 
roamed about the bridge and market-place until 
collected and trooped oflf to school by a black- 
robed Jesuit fr^re; and in the shade of the trees 
a dozen sprawling men in Breton costume 
smoked their microscopical pipes and watched 
the water. 

"They are an industrious race,'^ said I 
with fine irony, watching a happy inebriate 
pursuing a serpentine course toward the caf6 
opposite. 

Sweetheart, who was as patriotic a little girl 
as ever hummed the Marseillaise, and adopted 
France as long as she lived in it, was up in arms 
in an instant. 

"I have read,'^ she said with conviction, 
'^ that the Bretons are a brave, industrious race. 
They are French.'^ 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 147 

" They speak a different language/^ I said — 
*' not a word of French in it/' 

"They are French/' repeated Sweetheart, 
with an inflection which decided me to shun the 
subject until I could unpack my guide-book. 

We sat a little while longer under the trees, 
until we both began nodding and mutually ac- 
cused each other. Then Sweetheart went up 
to the room to take a nap, and I, scorning 
such weakness, lay down in a steamer chair 
under our window and fell fast asleep in no 
time. 

I was aroused by a big pink rose which hit 
me squarely on the mouth. Sweetheart was 
perched in the window seat above, and as I 
looked up she sent a shower of blossoms down 
upon me. 

"Jack, you lazy creature, it's five o'clock, 
and I'm dressed and ready for a walkl " 

" So am I," I said, jumping up. 

"But not like that. You must come up 
and make yourself nice for dinner." 

"Nice? What's the matter with these 
tweeds? Aren't these new stockings present- 
able?" 

"Look at your hair!" she said evasively. 
" Come up this minute and brush it." 

I went, and was compelled to climb into a 
white collar and shirt, and trousers of an Eng- 
lish cut. But before we had gone far along 
the great military road that climbed the heights 



148 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE, 

above the little river, I took Sweetheart's hand 
in mine and imparted to her my views and in- 
tentions upon the subject of my costume for the 
future. 

" You see, dearest, we are here in Brittany 
for three reasons. The first is, that I should 
paint outdoors. The second is, that we should 
economize like the deuce. The third is, our 
shadows '* 

" I know,'' she interrupted faintly. " Never 
mind. Jack, dear." 

We walked silently for a while, hand clasp- 
ing hand very tightly, for we were both think- 
ing of the third reason. 

I broke the silence first, speaking cheerfully, 
and she looked up with a quick smile while the 
shadow fell from her brow. 

" You see, dear, in this place, where we are 
going, there are no people but peasants. Your 
frocks are all right for a place like this; we must 
both wear our free-and-easy togs — ^I for paint- 
ing, and you for scrambling about after your 
wild flowers or fishing with me. If you get 
tired of seeing me in corduroys or tweeds, FU 
dress for you when you think you can't stand 
it any longer." 

**0h. Jack, I do like your knicker- 
bockers ^" 

^' .'Vnd you shall wear your most gorgeous- 
gown for me ^" 

'- Indeed I won't," she laughed, adding im- 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 149 

pulsively, *^ indeed I will — every day, if you 
wish it!'' 

At the top of the hill stood an ancient Ursu- 
line convent snrrounded by a high wall, which 
also inclosed the broad acres of the wealthy 
sisterhood. We sat down by the roadside hedge 
and looked across the valley, where the hurry- 
ing river had ceased to hasten and now lingered 
in placid pools and long, deep reaches. The 
6un had set behind the forest, and the sky threw 
a pnrple light over woods and meadow. The 
grassy pools below were swept by flocks of whis- 
tling martins and swallows. One or two white 
gulls flapped slowly toward the tide water be- 
low, and a young curlew, speeding high over- 
head, uttered a lonesome cry. The grass — ^the 
brilliant green grass of Brittany — ^had turned 
a deep metallic blue in the twUight. A pale 
primrose light grew and died in the sky, and 
the forest changed from rose to ashes. Then a 
dull red bar shot across the parting clouds in 
the west, the forest smouldered an instant, and 
the pools glowed crimson. Slowly the red bar 
melted away, the light died out among the 
branches, the pools turned sombre. Looking 
up, we saw the new moon flashing in the sky 
above our heads. Sweetheart sighed in perfect 
contentment. 

"Ifs beautifull'' I said, with another 
sigh. 

"Ah, yes,'' she murmured, "beautiful to 



150 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

you, and to me — ^to me. Jack, who have never 
before seen this land of Morbihan/' 

After a while she said, " And the ocean— oh, 
how I long to see itl Is it near ns. Jack? ^' 

" The river runs into it twenty kilometres 
below. We feel the tide at Quimperl6/^ I 
did not add, " Baedeker/' 

"I wonder,^^ I said presently, *^what are 
the feelings of a little American who sees 
this country — ^the real coimtry — ^for the first 
time?^' 

"I suppose you mean me,'^ she said. "I 
don't know — ^I donH think I understand it yet, 
but I know I shall love it, and never want to go 
back.'' 

*^ Perhaps we never shall," I said. "The 
magic second may stretch into years that end 
at last as all ends." 

Then our hands met in that sudden nerv- 
ous clasp which seemed to help and steady us 
when we were thinking of the real world, ^o 
long, so long forgotten. 

IX. 

I was awakened next morning by a sponge- 
f ul of cold water in the face, which I hate. I 
started up to wreak vengeance upon Sweetheart, 
but she fled to the toilet room and locked her- 
self in. From this retreat she taunted me imtil 
further sleep was out of the question, and I 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 161 

bowed to the inevitable — ^indignantly, when I 
saw my watch pointed to five o^eloek. 

Sweetheart was perfectly possessed to row; 
so when I had bolted my coffee and sat watch- 
ing her placidly sip hers, we decided to go 
down to the bank of the little stream and hire 
a boat. The boat was a wretched, shapeless 
affair, with two enormous oars and the rem- 
nants of rowlocks. It was the best boat in 
town, so we took it. I managed to get away 
from the bank, and, conscious of Sweetheart^s 
open admiration, pulled boldly down the stream. 
It was easy work, for the tide was ebbing. The 
river up to the bridge was tidal, but above the 
bridge it leaped and flowed, a regular salmon 
stream. Sweetheart was so impatient to take 
the oars that I relinquished them and picked 
up my rod. The boat swung down the stream 
and under the high stone viaduct, where I in- 
sisted on anchoring and whipping the prom- 
ising-looking water. The water was likely 
enough, and the sudden splash of a leaping 
grilse added to its likelihood. I was in hopes 
a grilse might become entangled with one of 
the flies, but though a big one shot up out of the 
water within five feet of Sweetheart, causing 
her to utter a suppressed scream, neither grilse 
nor trout rose to the beautiful lures I trailed 
about, and I only hooked two or three enormous 
dace, which came up like logs and covered the 
bottom of the boat with their coarse scales.. 
11 



152 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

Sweetheart had never seen a French trout 
uncooked, and scarcely shared my disappoint- 
ment. 

"They are splendid fish/* she repeated; 
'* you are unreasonable.** 

There was an ancient Breton squatting on 
the bank; from his sulky attitude I took 
him to be a poacher visiting his infernal set 
lines and snares; but I hailed him pleasantly 
with a bonjour, which he returned civilly 
enough. 

" Are there trout in this stream? ** 

''About the bridge/* he replied cautiously. 

*' Have you caught any? ** 

'' I ain*t fishing/* he said, much alarmed. 

"What*s that?** I demanded, pointing to 
as plump a trout as ever I saw, fioating on the 
end of a string under the bank. 

''Where?** he asked, looking about him 
with affected concern. 

"There!** 

He looked around, everywhere except where 
I pointed. He examined the horizon, and ihe 
tree tops, as though he expected a fish on 
every twig. I poled the boat up to the bank 
and pointed out the fish. 

"Ma douil** he exclaimed, "there is a 
fish!** 

" Yes, a trout,** I said. 

"Trout?** He burst into a forced laugh. 
"Trout! Hal hal Why, monsieur, that is a 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 163 

dace — ^a poor little dacel '' He hastily jerked it 
up with a long homemade gaff which lay— of 
course quite by accident — ^at his feet. 

" A poor little dace! '^ he mumbled. " Of 
course, monsieur would not care to claim such 
a poor, coarse little fish; but I am only too 
glad to eat it — ah, yes, only too gladl ^' 

"You see,'* said Sweetheart impulsively, 
" that you are wrong. Give him our fish; that 
will make four dace for the poor fellow/* 

I placed the three dace across the blade of 
my oar and held it out to the poacher. He 
took them as if he were really glad to get them. 
Then I said, " These are dace, and they don't 
have red spots.** 

He stood as if ready to bolt, but I laughed, 
and settled back on my oars, saying: " You're 
a poacher; but I don't care a continental, and 
you can poach all day in this confounded coun- 
try, where there is about one trout to the kilo- 
metre. Don't look scared. What do I care? 
Only don't tell me I'm unable to distinguish a 
trout when I can see the tip of his nose." 

I then sailed majestically out into the 
stream. 

Sweetheart wanted to know whether that 
was really a real poacher. She had read about 
them. Her ideal poacher was a young, stal- 
wart, eagle-eyed giant, with a tangle of hair 
and a disposition toward assassination. The 
reality shocked her. 



154: THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

"Anyway/^ she said, "you frightened the 
poor old thing. How rough men are! " 

We returned to the landing place with diffi- 
culty, for the tide was still on the ebb, and we 
got aground more than once. My hands were 
in a fine condition when at last I drove that 
wretched scow into the mud and lifted Sweet- 
heart out to the firm bank. The evil-eyed old 
man who rented us the boat glanced sardon- 
ically at my rod and blistered hands, and I was 
glad enough to pay him all he asked and break 
away for the hotel. 

We had an hour to lunch in, pack, and be 
ready for the trap which was to bear us to our 
destination — ^the distant village of Faouet, in 
Morbihan. 



A long drive on a smooth white road, acres 
of gorse and broom, beech woods and oak thick- 
ets, and the "Heu! heu! Alio! Aliens! en 
route! '^ of the Breton driver, these are my 
recollections of the ride to Faouet. There are 
others, too — ^the hedges heavy with bloom, the 
perfume of the wild honeysuckle, the continual 
bird chorus from every grove and every bramble 
patch — and Sweetheart's veil flying into my 
face. 

We have spoken of it since together, but 
she has few recollections of that jpumey. She 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 155 

only remembers it as her first steps into our 
heritage. 

And so we entered into our heritage. Sweet- 
heart and I; and our heritage was very fair, for 
it lay ever3rwrhere about us. It was a world 
which we alone inhabited. Men said, "This 
land is Gloanec V' " This is Gumalec V' " This 
is Kerdec's^*; they spoke of "my woods" and 
"his meadows" and "their pastures." And 
how we laughed; for when we passed together 
through their lands, around us, far as the eye 
could reach, our heritage lay in the sunshine. 

XI. 

One day, when Sweetheart had been weep- 
ing — ^f or we were thinking of the end to the 
magic second — ^I spoke of our heritage which 
swept far as the eye could reach across the 
moors of Faouet. 

She said: " The past is ours. Jack; the pres- 
ent is ours; the future ^^ 

We tried to smile, but our hearts were like 
lead. Yet we know that the future will also 
be ours. I know it as I write. 

xn. 

The letter from St. Gildas, bringing with it 
a breath of salt air, lay on the table before us. 
Sweetheart clasped her hands and looked at 
me. 



166 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

"Fm in favour of going at once/^ I said 
for the third time. Over by the wall were piled 
my canvases^ the result of three months in 
Faouet. 

The first was a study of Sweetheart under 
the trees of the ancient orchard in the convent 
grounds. What trouble I had had with that 
canvasi I remembered the morning that the 
old gardener came over and stood behind me 
as I painted; and when I had replied to Ms 
" Good-morning/^ I recalled the pang his next 
words gave me: 

*' I am so sorry, monsieur, but it is forbidden 
to enter the convent grounds.'' 

My canvas was almost finished, and, as the 
romancers have it, "my despair was great!'' 
A month's work for nothing — or next to noth- 
ing! 

Sweetheart rose from her pose on the low 
bough of the apple tree and came over to my 
side. " Never mind. Jack; I shall go and ask 
the Mother Superior about it." 

I knew that she would win over the Mother 
Superior; and when, that evening, she came 
back radiant, crying, " She is lovely! — she says 
you may finish the picture, and I think you 
ought to go and thank her," I put on my cap, 
and stepping across the street, we rang at the 
gate. 

The old gardener let us in, and in a moment 
I stood before the latticed windows behind 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 157 

which some one was moving. In a low voice the 
invisible nun told us that the Superior granted 
to us the privilege of working in the orchard, 
but we must be careful of the grass, because it 
was almost time to cut it. 

" I am sure we may have confidence in you,^* 
she said. 

*^We will not trample the grass, my sister, 
and I thank you for us both.^' 

The lattice trembled, was raised a little, and 
then fell. 

" You are English,^' said the hidden nun. 

" I am American, my sister.'' 

I looked at the lattice a moment, then 
dropped my eyes. I may have been mistaken, 
but I think she sighed. 

Sweetheart came closer to the lattice and 
murmured her thanks. 

There was a pause. 

Then came the voice again, sweet and 
gentle: "May Our Lady of Saint Gildas pro- 
tect you ''; and we went out by the little iron 
wicket. 

The next picture was another study of 
Sweetheart in the woods; the next, another 
study of Sweetheart; and the others were 
studies of the same young lady. 

The light in the room had grown dim, and 
I walked to the window which overlooked the 
convent chapel. The chapel windows were 
open; within, the nuns stood or knelt chant- 



168 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

ing. Three white-veiled figures were advan- 
cing to the altar, and the others, draped in black 
now knelt behind. I didnH think I had any 
business to look at them, so I did not. After 
all, they were cloistered nuns, and it was only 
on hot nights that they opened the chapel win- 
dows. Sweetheart was speaking beside my 
shoulder. 

"Poor things! The ones in white, they 
are the novices; they will never see parente 
or friends again. When they enter the 
gates they never leave — ^never; they are buried 
there." 

I said: " After all, we are much like them. 
We have left all; we have nothing now but 
each other, for the world is dead, and we are 
bound by vows which keep us within the nar- 
row confines of our heritage." 

" But our heritage is everjrwhere — as far as 
we can see." 

" Ah, yes, but we can only see to the horizon. 
There is a world beyond." 

"I have renounced it," said Sweetheart 
faintly. 

XIII. 

The letter from St. Gildas had been lying 
on our table for a week before I thought of 
answering it, and even then it was Sweetheart 
who wrote: 



the white shadow. 159 

" Dear Mb. Stuakt: 

"Jack is too lazy to answer your kind note, 
so, in pure shame for his discourtesy, I hasten 
to reply to your questions. 

"Krst: Yes; we have been working very 
hard, and Jack^s pictures are charming, though 
he growls over them all day. 

"Second: Yes; we intend to stay in Brit- 
tany this winter for lots of reasons— one being 
economy, and another. Jack's outdoor paint- 
ing. 

" Third: Yes; we are coming to St. Gildas. 

"Fourth: To-morrow. 

"Fifth: No; we had not heard of Mr. 
Clifford's affair with the policeman; and oh, I 
am so sorry he was locked up and fined I Jack 
laughs. I suspect he, too, was as wicked as 
you all when he was a student, alone in Paris. 

" Sixth: I know you are Jack's oldest and 
most intimate friend, so I allow you more lib- 
erty than I do Messieurs Clifford and Elliott; 
therefore I will answer your question as to 
whether the honeymoon is not on the wane. 
No! no! no! There are three answers to one 
question. See how generous I can be! '' 

Sweetheart called me to see whether or not 
I approved. I did, and added my answer to 
Stuarfs last question as follows: "N"o, you 
idiot!" Then I signed the note, and Sweet- 
heart sealed and directed it. 



160 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

So we left for St. Gildas next morning be* 
fore sunrise and in the rain. This leaving at 
such an unearthly hour was not my doing, but 
Sweetheart was determined, and rose by candle- 
light in spite of desperate opposition on my 
part. It was cold, and the rain beat against 
the windows. 

It was many kilometres to St. Gildas, but be- 
fore we had gone six, the rain had ceased and 
the eastern sky flushed to a pale rose. 

" Thank goodness! ^^ I said, " we shall have 
the sun." 

Then the daily repeated miracle of the com- 
ing of dawn was wrought before our eyes. The 
heavens glowed in rainbow tints; the shredded 
mist rising along the river was touched with 
purple and gold, and acres of meadow and pas- 
ture dripped precious stones. Shreds of the 
fading night-mist drifted among the tree tops, 
now tipped with fire, while in the forest depths 
faint sparkles came from some lost ray of morn- 
ing light falling on wet leaves. Then of a 
sudden up shot the sun, and against it, black 
and gigantic, a peasant towered, leaning upon 
his spade. 

xrv. 

We were fast nearing the end of our long 
journey. The sim blazed on us from the 
zenith, and the wheels creaked with the heat of 
the white road. The driver leaned back, say- 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 161 

ing, " We enter Finist^re here by this granite 
post." Presently he added, " The ocean! '^ 

There it lay, a basin of silver and blue. 
Sweetheart had started to her feet, speechless, 
one hand holding to my shoulder, the other 
clasped to her breast. And now, as the road 
wound through the hills and down to the coast, 
long stretches of white sand skirted the distant 
cliffs, and over the cliffs waved miles and miles 
of yellow gorse. A cluster of white and gray 
houses lay in the hollow to the left almost at 
the mouth of the river, and beyond, the waves 
were beating in the bar — ^beating the same 
rhjrthm which we were to hear so long there 
together, day and night. There was not a boat 
to be seen, not a creature, nor was there any 
sign of life save for the smoke curling from 
a cottage chimney below. The ocean lay 
sparkling beneath, and beyond its deeper blue 
melted into the haze on the horizon. 

Suddenly, in the road below, the figure of a 
man appeared, and at the same moment a 
pointer pup came gambolling up beside us in 
an ecstasy of self-abnegation and apology. I 
sprang out of the lumbering vehicle and lifted 
Sweetheart to the ground, and in an instant we 
were shaking hands with a stalwart young fel- 
low in knickerbockers and jersey, who said we 
were a pretty pair not to have come sooner, 
and told Sweetheart he pitied her lot — ^meaning 
me. 



162 THE MYSTEKY OP CHOICE. 

Then we walked arm in arm down a fragrant 
lane to the river bank, where the dearest old 
lady toddled out of the granite house to welcome 
us and show us our rooms. Sweetheart went 
with her, while I stopped an instant to chat with 
Stuart. 

" That is Madame Ylven,'' he said. " She 
is the most stunning peasant woman in Finis- 
t6re, and you will want for nothing/^ Then, 
after a moment, ^^ Good heavens! Jack, what a 

beauty your wife ^^ He stopped short, but 

added, "What a delicious little beauty Sweet- 
heart has grown to be! ^' 

A white-coiffed maid came to the door, and 
said, "Will monsieur have the goodness to 
come? Madame wishes him to see the rooms.'* 

The wind blew from the south, and the 
thunder of the sea was in my ears as I mounted 
the stairs to our new quarters. 

Sweetheart met me at the door, saying, " It 
seems almost too much happiness to bear, but 
I feel that we are at home at last — ^alone to- 
gether for all time.'' 

Alone together? The ocean at our thresh- 
old, the moors and forests at our back, and a 
good slate roof above us. Before me through 
the open door I could see the great old-fash- 
ioned room, warm in the afternoon sunlight — 
the room we were to live in so long, the room 
in which we were to pass the happiest and bit- 
terest moments of our lives. 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 163 

She hesitated an instant before the thresh- 
old. I think we knew that we stood upon the 
threshold of our destiny. Then I said, half in 
earnest: ^* Are you afraid to cross with me into 
the nnknown future? See, the room is filled 
with sunshine. Are you afraid? '^ 

She sprang across the threshold, and, turn- 
ing to me, held out both hands. 

XV. 

The sun slipped lower and lower into the 
sea, until a distant tossing wave washed it out 
against the sky. Light died in the room, and 
shadows closed around us; yet it was in the 
darkness and shadows that we drew nearer to 
each other, then and after. 

XVI. 

Stuart stood under our window and yelled 
up at me, " Oh, Jack! I say. Jack! " 

Sweetheart, who was fussing over the half- 
unpacked trunk, went to the window and threw 
open the panes. 

" You don't mean to say you have had your 
coffee? '^ she said. *^ Jack isnH up yet.'' 

^^ Jack is up," I explained, coming to the 
window in pajamas. " Hello! " 

*^I only wanted to say that I haven't had 
my coffee," he explained, "and I'm going to 
take it with you when you're ready." 



164 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

Sweetheart picked up her b6ret, and, pass- 
ing a hatpin through it, turned to me with a 
warning, "I shall eat all the breakfast, mon- 
sieur! ^' and vanished down the stairs. A mo- 
ment later I heard her clear voice below: 

Sonnez le chceur, 

Chasseur I 
Sonnez la mort I 

Before I had finished dressing. Sweetheart 
tripped in with my cofifee and toast. 

"Of course IVe finished,^^ she said, "and 
you don't deserve this. Mr. Stuart has gone oflE 
with his canvases, and says he'll see you at 
lunch." 

I swallowed the coffee and browsed on little 
squares of toast which she condescendingly but- 
tered for me, and then, lighting a cigarette, 
I announced my intention of commanding an 
exploring expedition consisting of Sweetheart 
and myself. A scratching at the door and a 
patter of feet announced that I had been over- 
heard. 

Sweetheart unlatched the door, and the 
pointer pup of the evening before charged into 
the room and covered us with boisterous ca- 
resses, which we took to indicate that he not 
only approved of the expedition, but intended 
to undertake the general supervision of it him- 
self. I resigned the leadership at once. 

"His name," said Sweetheart in the tone^ 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 166 

of one who presents a distinguished guest, '^ is 

I gravely acknowledged the honour by pat- 
ting his head. 

"Fm afraid/^ I said to Sweetheart, "that 
there is a bar sinister upon his escutcheon, but 
possibly it is only the indelible mark of the 
conquering British foxhound.'^ 

Sweetheart said, " Nonsense! '* and the ex- 
pedition moved. Luff leading with a series of 
ear-splitting orders in the dog language which 
we perfectly understood. 

In ten minutes we stood on the cliffs, the 
salt wind whipping our faces. Saint-Gildas- 
des-Pr& lay at our feet. 

'* I know,^^ observed Sweetheart calmly, " all 
about this place. Captain Ylven told me at 
breakfast.^' 

"Weiy^ said I, "what's that island on the 
horizon?*' 

Then she overwhelmed me with erudition, 
until I longed for Baedeker and revenge. 

" That is the Isle de Groix, and all about us 
is the Bay of Biscay. This little hamlet on the 
cliff is St. Julien, and if we follow the coast 
far enough we come to Lorient." 

" Follow the coast? Which way? " 

Sweetheart had forgotten, and I triumphed 
in silence, until she stamped her foot and 
marched off to assist Luff in investigating a 
suspicious hole in the cliff. 



166 THE MYSTEKY OF CHOICE. 

I went to the edge of the plateau and looked 
over. The surf thundered against the rocks, 
tossing long strands of seaweed over the pebbly 
beach. A man with a wooden rake stood in the 
water up to his knees. He raked the seaweed 
from the breakers as a farmer rakes weeds from 
the lawn. The salt wind began to sting my lips 
and eyes. My throat felt dry and salty. I 
turned toward the hamlet of St. Gildas. I had 
not imagined it so small. Besides our house 
there were but three others clustered under 
the river bank. Behind it stretched woods and 
grain fields broken by patches of yellow gorse. 
Across the river stood a stone chapel almost lost 
in the miles of moorland. To the east and 
west the downs covered with gorse and heather 
rolled to the horizon. Here and there along the 
cliffs stood what appeared to be the ruins of an- 
cient forts, and on a rock, just where the river 
sweeps out into the sea, rose a dirty white sig- 
nal tower. The tower was low and squatty 
and wet. It looked like some saline excrescence 
which had slowly exuded from the brine-soaked 
rock. On the bar hundreds of white gulls rose 
and settled as the tide encroached; curlew were 
running along the foam-splashed shore under 
the eastern cliffs across the river. 

On our side of the river the cliffs were cov- 
ered with blackthorn and hawthorn, with here 
and there a stunted oak, probably so placed by 
Providence as general rendezvous for all the 



THE WHITE SHADOW. • 167 

small twittering birds of Finist^re. Birds were 
everywhere. From the clouds came the cease- 
less carol of skylarks; from the grain fields and 
the flowering gorse rose an unbroken chorus, 
taken up and repeated by flocks of microscop- 
ical songsters among the blackthorns on the 
cliffs. 

"This is paradise, this wilderness,'* I 
thought. 

Then, as I heard Sweetheart's mocking voice 
from the cliff: 

O fr^re Jaqnes, 
Dormez yous ! 

"I'm not asleep!" I cried in answer. 
"What is it?" 

" Luff has unearthed a poor little mole, but 
I won't allow him to hurt it." 

"Jack, dear," she said, as I came up, 
" couldn't we keep it as a pet? See, the poor 
little thing is blind." 

As it was blind we called it " Love," which 
later was changed to " Cupid," and finally, when 
we discovered it true gormandizing character, 
for "Cupid" we substituted "Cupidity," by 
which name it flourished and fattened. 

"What a change," said Sweetheart sadly, 
" from Blind Love to Blind Greedl " 

The mole grew very fat. 



13 



168 THE MYSTEBY OP CHOICE. 



xvn. 

When the winds stir the leaves among the 
poplars, and the long shadows fall athwart the 
fields; when the winds rise at night, and the 
branches scrape and crack above the moonlit 
snow; when in the long hot days the earth is 
bathed in fragrance, and all the little creatures 
of the fields are silent; when in the still even- 
ings the flowers perfume the air, and the gravel 
walks shine white in the moonlight; when the 
breezes quicken from the distant coast; when 
the sand shakes beneath the shock of the break- 
ers, and every wave is plumed with white; when 
the calm eye of the beacon turns to mine, lin- 
gers, and turn away, and the surf is yeasty and 
thick; when I start at the sound of a voice from 
the cliffs, and my eyes are raised in vain; 
when the white gulls toss and drift in the storm- 
clouds, and the water hurries out in the black 
ebb tide; when I rise and look from the win- 
dow; when I dress; when I work with pen and 
colour; when I rest; when I walk; when I 
sleep— there is one face before my eyes, one 
name on my lips. For the white shadow is 
turning gray, and God alone knows the end. 

xvin. 

And God alone knows the end, for the mists 
are crowding, brooding like angry-browed 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 169 

clouds, and I hear the whistle of unseen winds, 
and my life-flame wavers and sinks and flares, 
blown hither and thither, tossing, fading, leap- 
ing, but fading, always fading. 

In a flash, like a printed picture on a screen, 
illuminated, keenly etched in the white glare, 
I see the bed, and the people around me, the 
black gowns, the pale eyes of the doctor, the 
sponge and basin, the rolls of lint. 

Voices, minute but clean-cut and clear as 
picked harp-strings, tinkle in my ears; the voice 
of the doctor, other voices, but always the voice 
of the doctor — " The splinter of bone on the 
brain; the splinter pressing on the tissues; the 
depression.'* 

The doctor! That is the man! That is the 
man who comes to my side, who follows, fol- 
lows where I go, who seeks me throughout the 
world! I saw him as I lay flimg on the turf, 
limp, unconscious, below the cliffs on the Aspen 
hills; I felt his presence in the studio; I heard 
him creeping at my heels across the gorse thick- 
ets of St. Gildas. And now he has come 
to cut short the magic second, to turn back 
time — ^back, back, into the old worn channels, 
rock-ribbed and salt with tears. 

As a leaf of written paper torn in two, so 
shall my life be torn in two; and the long tear 
shall mangle the chapter written in rose and 
gold. 

Then, too, my shadow, already turned from 



170 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

white to gray, shall fall with a deeper stain 
wherever I pass; and I shall see the yellow gorse 
glimmer and turn to golden-rod, and the pop- 
lars turn to oaks; and the twin towers of Notre 
Dame, filmy, lace-carved, and gray with cen- 
turies, shall dwindle as I look— dwindle and 
sway and turn to pines, singing pines that mur- 
mur to the winds, blowing across the Aspen 
hills. 

All that is fair shall pass away; all that I 
love, all that I fear for — these shall the doctor 
take away, lifting them from my memory on 
the point of a steel blade. What has he to 
give in return? A hell of vapour, distorting 
sight; a hell of soimd, drowning the soul. 

Gigantic apparitions arise across the world 
of water, wavering like shadows on the clouds. 
Steel-clad, clothed in skins, casqued in steel, 
their winged heads bend and nod and move 
against the clouds. And even they are chang- 
ing as clouds change shape. I see steel limbs 
turn red and naked. I see winged casques trail 
to the earth, feathered, painted in colours of 
earth 

Ih6! Inah! Et6I E-h6I 

The bridge of stars spans the vast lake of air; 
the sun and the moon travel over it. 

My shadow is turning dark; I can scarcely 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 171 

eee the doctor, but now — God have mercy! — I 
can touch him. 



All the high spectres are stooping from the 
clouds, bending above me to watch. I know 
them and their eyes of shadow — ^I know them 
now; H^en that was to Chask^what H4rp8tin& 
shall be to Hap^da; and Hftrka shall come after 
all with the voice of winter winds: 

*'Ak6n,ak6n,ak6uI^' 

But the magic second shall never return. 

** Ma c&nt6 mas6cal *' 

Now they leave my bed, the people who 
crowded there under the shadowy forms of the 
spectres; now the doctor bends over; I see and 
feel him. His hands are tangled in the threads 
of time; he is cutting a thread; he 



zix. 

When I spoke to him first I spoke in the 
French language. Before he answered, the 
scream of a blue jay in the elms outside set my 
nerves aquiver, and I called for Donald and 
Walter. 

As I lay there I could see the Aspen hills 
from the window, heaps of crumpled gold 
bathed in sunshine. Over them sailed the froth 
from the silken milkweed; over them drifted 



172 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

the big brown-red butterflies^ luminous as rich* 
est autumn leaves. 

Some one closed the door softly. The doc- 
tor had gone. 

The sunlight poured into the window^ etch- 
ing my shadow on the wall behind. Lying 
very still there I saw it motionless beside me. 
The shadow was blach 

Somebody said in the next room, " Will he 
die?^' 

"Die? ''I said aloud. 

A bird twittered outside my window. 

The door opened again, noiselessly. 

*' Sweetheart? '^ I whispered. 

"Yes, Jack.'' 

After a moment I said, " When do you go 
back to school?'' 

"I? I finished school a year ago." 

" Come nearer." 

*' I am here. Jack." 

*^ Time stopped a year ago." 

" A year ago to-day." 

The same gray eyes, the same face, paler, 
perhaps. 

"We have journeyed far," I sighed, "al- 
ways together, but in those dajrs our shadows 
were white as snow. Am I going to die? There 
are tears in your eyes." 

They fell on my cheek; her arms fell too, 
closer, closer, around my neck. 

" Life has begun," she said. 



THE WHITE SHADOW. 173 

"life? What was the year that ends to- 
day? The magic second of life? ^^ 

" A year of death, to mel '* 

Ah, bnt her soul knows of a life in death! 
And she shall know it, too, when her shadow 
turns whiter than snow. For the Temple of 
Idols has closed its doors at the sound of a 
voice, and an idol of gilt has turned to flesh and 
blood. 

I.h6I 

So shall she know of the life in death when 
her soul and her body are one. 



PASSEUK. 



O friends, I've serred ye iood and bed ; 

friends, the mist is rising wet ; 
Then bide a moment, my dead, 

Where, lonely, I must linger yet ! 

176 



PASSEUR 

Because man goeth to his long home. 
And the mourners go about the streets. 

When he had finished his pipe he tapped 
the brier bowl against the chimney until the 
ashes powdered the charred log smouldering 
across the andirons. Then he sank back in his 
chair, absently touching the hot pipe-bowl with 
the tip of each finger until it grew cool enough 
to be dropped into his coat pocket. 

Twice he raised his eyes to the little Amer- 
ican clock ticking upon the mantel. He had 
half an hour to wait. 

The three candles that lighted the room 
might be trimmed to advantage; this would 
give him something to do. A pair of scissors 
lay open upon the bureau, and he rose and 
picked them up. For a while he stood dreamily 
shutting and opening the scissors, his eyes roam- 
ing about the room. There was an easel in the 
comer, and a pile of dusty canvases behind it; 
behind the canvases there was a shadow — ^that 
gray, menacing shadow that never moved. 

When he had trimmed each candle he wiped 
177 



178 THE MYSTEEY OP CHOICE. 

the smoky scissors on a paint rag and flung 
them on the bureau again. The clock pointed 
to ten; he had been occupied exactly three min- 
utes. 

The bureau was littered with neckties, pipes, 
combs and brushes, matches, reels and fly- 
books, collars, shirt studs, a new pair of Scotch 
shooting stockings, and a woman^s workbasket. 

He picked out all the neckties, folded them 
once, and hung them over a bit of twine that 
stretched across the looking-glass; the shirt 
studs he shovelled into the top drawer along 
with brushes, combs, and stockings; the reels 
and fly-books he dusted with his handkerchief 
and placed methodically along the mantel shelf. 
Twice he stretched out his hand toward the 
woman^s workbasket, but his hand fell to his 
side again, and he turned away into the room 
staring at the dying fire. 

Outside the snow-sealed window a shutter 
broke loose and banged monotonously, until he 
flung open the panes and fastened it. The soft, 
wet snow, that had choked the window-panes 
all day, was frozen hard now, and he had to 
break the polished crust before he could find 
the rusty shutter hinge. 

He leaned out for a moment, his numbed 
hands resting on the snow, the roar of a rising 
snow-squall in his ears; and out across the deso- 
late garden and stark hedgerow he saw the flat 
black river spreading through the gloom. 



PASSEUR. 179 

A candle sputtered and snapped behind 
him; a sheet of drawing-paper fluttered across 
the fioor^ and he closed the panes and turned 
back into the room, both hands in his worn 
pockets. 

The little American clock on the mantel 
ticked and ticked, but the hands lagged, for 
he had not been occupied five minutes in all. 
He went up to the mantel and watched the 
hands of the clock. A minute — ^longer than a 
year to him — crept by. 

Around the room the furniture stood ranged 
— a chair or two of yellow pine, a table, the 
easel, and in one comer the broad curtained 
bed; and behind each lay shadows, menacing 
shadows that never moved. 

A little pale flame started up from the smok- 
ing log on the andirons; the room sang with 
the sudden hiss of escaping wood gases. After 
a little the back of the log caught fire; jets of 
blue flared up here and there with mellow 
sounds like the lighting of gas-burners in a 
row, and in a moment a thin sheet of yellow 
flame wrapped the whole charred log. 

Then the shadows moved; not the shadows 
behind the furniture — ^they never moved — ^but 
other shadows, thin, gray, confusing, that came 
and spread their slim patterns all around him, 
and trembled and trembled. 

He dared not step or tread upon them, they 
were too real; they meshed the floor around 



180 THE MYSTEEY OF CHOICE. 

his f eet, they ensnared his knees^ they fell across 
his breast like ropes. Some nighty in the si- 
lence of the moors, when wind and river were 
still, he feared these strands of shadow might 
tighten — creep higher aronnd his throat and 
tighten. But even then he knew that those 
other shadows would never move, those gray 
shapes that knelt crouching in every comer. 

When he looked up at the clock again ten 
minutes had straggled past. Time was dis- 
turbed in the room; the strands of shadow 
seemed entangled among the hands of the 
clock, dragging them back from their rotation. 
He wondered if the shadows would strangle 
Time, some still night when the wind and the 
flat river were silent. 

There grew a sudden chill across the floor; 
the cracks of the boards let it in. He leaned 
down and drew his sabots toward him from 
their place near the andirons, and slipped them 
over his chaussons; and as he straightened up, 
his eyes mechanically sought the mantel above, 
where in the dusk another pair of sabots stood, 
little, slender, delicate sabots, carved from red 
beach. A yearns dust grayed their surface; a 
yearns rust dulled the silver band across the in- 
step. He said this to himself aloud, know- 
ing that it was within a few minutes of the 
year. 

His own sabots came from Mort-Dieu; they 
were shaved square and banded with steel. Birt 



PASSEUB. 181 

in days past he had thought that no sabot in 
Mort-Dieu was delicate enough to touch the 
instep of the Mort-Dieu passeur. So he sent to 
the shore lighthouse, and they sent to Lorient, 
where the women are coquettish and show their 
hair under the coifEe, and wear dainty sabots; 
and in this town, where vanity corrapts and 
their is much lace on coiffe and collarette, a pair 
of delicate sabots was found, banded with silver 
and chiselled in red beach. The sabots stood 
on the mantel above the fire now, dusty and 
tarnished. 

There was a sound from the window, the soft 
murmur of snow blotting glass panes. The 
wind, too, muttered under the roof eaves. Pres- 
ently it would begin to whisper to him from 
the chinmey — ^he kQew it — and he held his 
hands over his ears and stared at the clock. 

In the hamlet of Mort-Dieu the pines sing 
all day of the sea secrets, but in the night the 
ghosts of little gray birds fill the branches, 
singing of the stmshine of past years. He heard 
the song as he sat, and he crushed his hands 
over his ears; but the gray birds joined with 
the wind in the chimney, and he heard all that 
he dared not hear, and he thought all that he 
dared not hope or think, and the swift tears 
scalded his eyes. 

In Mort-Dieu the nights are longer than 
anywhere on earth; he knew it — ^why should he 
not know? This had been so for a year; it 



182 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

was different before. There were so many 
things different before; days and nights van- 
ished like minutes then; the pines told no se- 
crets of the sea, and the gray birds had not yet 
come to Mort-Dieu. Also, there was Jeanne, 
passeur at the Cannes. 

When he first saw her she was poling the 
square, flat-bottomed ferry skiff from the Cannes 
to Mort-Dieu, a red handkerchief bound across 
her silky black hair, a red skirt fluttering just 
below her knees. The next time he saw her he 
had to call to her across the placid river, " Oh61 
Oh6, passeur! '' She came, poling the flat skiff, 
her deep blue eyes fixed pensively on him, the 
scarlet skirt and kerchief idly flapping in the 
April wind. Then day followed day when the 
far call "Passeurl^^ grew clearer and more 
joyous, and the faint answering cry, '' I come! '^ 
rippled across the water like music tinged with 
laughter. Then spring came, and with spring 
came love — ^love, carried free across the ferry 
from the Cannes to Mort-Dieu. 

The flame above the charred log whistled, 
flickered, and went out in a jet of wood vapour, 
only to play like lightning above the gas and 
relight again. The clock ticked more loudly, 
and the song from the pines filled the room. 
But in his straining eyes a summer landscape 
was refiected, where white clouds sailed and 
white foam curled under the square bow of a 
little skiff. And he pressed his numbed hands 



PASSEUB. 183 

tighter to his ears to drown the cry, " Passeur! 
Passeur! ^' 

And now for a moment the clock ceased 
ticking. It was time to go — ^who bnt he should 
know it, he who went out into the night swing- 
ing his lantern? And he went. He had gone 
each night from the first — ^from that first 
strange winter evening when a strange voice 
had answered him across the river, the voice 
of the new passeur. He had never heard her 
voice again. 

So he passed down the windy wooden stairs, 
lantern hanging lighted in his hand, and 
stepped out into the storm. Through sheets of 
drifting snow, over heaps of frozen seaweed and 
icy drift he moved, shifting his lantern right 
and left, imtil its glimmer on the water warned 
him. Then he called out into the night, 
*' Passeur!'* The frozen spray spattered his 
face and crusted the lantern; he heard the dis- 
tant boom of breakers beyond the bar, and the 
noise of mighty winds among the seaward cliffs. 

"Passeur!'' 

Across the broad flat river, black as a sea of 
pitch, a tiny light sparkled a moment. Again 
he cried, ^^ Passeur! " 

'a come!" 

He turned ghastly white, for it was her 
voice — or was he crazy? — and he sprang waist 
deep into the icy current and cried out again, 
but his voice ended in a sob. 
13 



184 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

Slowly through the snow the flat skiff took 
shape, creeping nearer and nearer. But she 
was not at the pole — ^he saw that; there was 
only a tall, thin man, shrouded to the eyes in 
oilskin; and he leaped into the boat and bade 
the ferryman hasten. 

Halfway across he rose in the skiff, and 
called, "Jeanne!^' But the roar of the storm 
and the thrashing of icy waves drowned his 
voice. Yet he heard her again, and she called 
to him by name. 

When at last the boat grated upon the in- 
visible shore, he lifted his lantern, trembling, 
stumbling among the rocks, and calling to her, 
as though his voice could silence the voice that 
had spoken a year ago that night. And it could 
not. He sank shivering upon his knees, and 
looked out into the darkness, where an ocean 
rolled across a world. Then his stiff lips moved, 
and he repeated her name; but the hand of the 
ferryman fell gently upon his head. 

And when he raised his eyes he saw that the 
ferryman was Death. 



THE KEY TO GRIEF. 



The moving finger writes, and, having writ, 
Moves on ; nor all your piety nor wit 

Shall lure it back to caned luJf a line, 
Nor all your tears wash out a word of it. 

FlTZQEAALD. 

186 



THE KEY TO GRIEF. 

The wild hawk to the wind-swept sky 

The deer to the wholesome wold. 
And the heart of a man to the heart of a maid, 

As it was in the days of old. 

Kipling. 



They were doing their work very badly. 
They got the rope around his neck, and tied his 
wrists with moose-bush withes, but again he 
fell, sprawling, turning, twisting over the leaves, 
tearing up everything around him like a trapped 
panther. 

He got the rope away from them; he elimg 
to it with bleeding fists; he set his white teeth 
in it, until the jute strands relaxed, unravelled, 
and snapped, gnawed through by iis white 
teeth. 

Twice TuUy struck him with a gum hook. 
The dull blows fell on flesh rigid as stone. 

Panting, foul with forest mould and rotten 
leaves, hands and face smeared with blood, he 
sat up on the ground, glaring at the circle of 
men around him. 

"Shoot himl'^ gasped Tully, dashing the 
187 



188 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

sweat from his bronzed brow; and Bates, 
breathing heavily, sat down on a log and 
dragged a revolver from his rear pocket. The 
man on the ground watched him; there was 
froth in the comers of his mouth. 

" Git back! ^' whispered Bates, but his voice 
and hand trembled. "Kent/^ he stammered, 
"won't ye hang?'' 

The man on the ground glared. 

" Ye've got to die, Kent," he urged; " they 
all say so. Ask Lefty Sawyer; ask Dyce; ask 
Carrots. — ^He's got to swing fur it — ain't he, 
TuUy? — ^Kent, fur God's sake, swing fur these 
here gents! " 

The man on the ground panted; his bright 
eyes never moved. 

After a moment Tully sprang on him again. 
There was a flurry of leaves, a crackle, a gasp 
and a grunt,, then the thumping and thrashing 
of two bodies writhing in the brush. Dyce and 
Carrots jumped on the prostrate men. Lefty 
Sawyer caught the rope again, but the jute 
strands gave way and he stumbled. Tully be- 
gan to scream, "He's chokin' me!" Dyce 
staggered out into the open, moaning over a 
broken wrist. 

"Shoot!" shouted Lefty Sawyer, and 
dragged Tully aside. "Shoot, Jim Bates! 
Shoot straight, b' God! " 

" Git back! " gasped Bates, rising from the 
fallen log. 



THE KEY TO GKIEF. 189 

The crowd parted right and left; a quick 
report rang out — ^another — ^another. Then 
from the whirl of smoke a tall form staggered, 
dealing blows — ^blows that sounded sharp as the 
crack of a whip. 

''He's oflE! Shoot straight!'' they cried. 

There was a gallop of heavy boots in the 
woods. Bates, faint and dazed, turned his 
head. 

"Shoot!" shrieked Tully. 

But Bates was sick; his smoking revolver 
fell to the groxmd; his white face and pale eyes 
contracted. It lasted only a moment; he started 
after the others, plunging, wallowing through 
thickets of osier and hemlock underbrush. 

Far ahead he heard Kent crashing on like a 
yoxmg moose in November, and he knew he was 
making for the shore. The others knew too. 
Already the gray gleam of the sea cut a straight 
line along the forest edge; already the soft 
clash of the surf on the rocks broke faintly 
through the forest silence. 

"He's got a canoe there!" bawled Tully. 
"He'll be into it!" 

And he was into it, kneeling in the bow, 
driving his paddle to the handle. The rising 
sun gleamed like red lightning on the flashing 
blade; the canoe shot to the crest of a wave, 
hung, bows dripping in the wind, dropped into 
the depths, glided, tipped, rolled, shot up again, 
staggered, and plunged on. 



190 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

Tully ran straight out into the cove surf; 
the water broke against his chesty bare and wet 
with sweat. Bates sat down on a worn black 
rock and watched the canoe listlessly. 

The canoe dwindled to a speck of gray and 
silver; and when Carrots, who had run back to 
the gum camp for a rifle, returned, the speck 
on the water might have been easier to hit than 
a loon^s head at twilight. So Carrots, being 
thrifty by nature, fired once, and was satisfied 
to save the other cartridges. The canoe was 
still visible, making for the open sea. Some- 
where beyond the horizon lay the keys, a string 
of rocks bare as skulls, black and sUmy where 
the sea cut their base, white on the crests with 
the excrement of sea birds. 

" He's makin' fur the Key to Grief! '' whis- 
pered Bates to Dyce. 

Dyce, moaning, and nursing his broken 
wrist, turned a sick face out to sea. 

The last rock seaward was the Key to Grief, 
a splintered pinnacle polished by the sea. Prom 
the Key to Grief, seaward a da/s paddle, if a 
man dared, lay the long wooded island in the 
ocean known as Grief on the charts of the bleak 
coast. 

In the history of the coast, two men had 
made the voyage to the Key to Grief, and from 
there to the island. One of these was a rum- 
crazed pelt hunter, who lived to come back; 
the other was a college youth; they found his 



THE KEY TO GBIEF. 191 

battered canoe at sea^ and a day later his bat- 
tered body was flung up in the cove. 

So, when Bates whispered to Dyce, and 
when Dyce called to the others, they knew that 
the end was not far off for Kent and his canoe; 
and they turned away into the forest, sullen, 
but satined that Kent would get his dues when 
the devil got his. 

Lefty spoke vaguely of the wages of sin. 
Carrots, with an eye to thrift, suggested a plan 
for an equitable division of Kent's property. 

When they reached the gum camp they piled 
Kent's personal effects on a blanket. 

Carrots took the inventory: a revolver, two 
gum hooks, a fur cap, a nickel-plated watch, 
a pipe, a pack of new cards, a gum sack, forty 
poxmds of spruce gum, and a frying pan. 

Carrots shuffled the cards, picked out the 
joker, and flipped it pensively into the fire. 
Then he dealt cold decks all aroxmd. 

When the goods and chattels of their late 
companion had been divided by chance — ^for 
there was no chance to cheat—somebody re- 
membered Tully. 

" He's down there on the coast, starin' after 
the canoe," said Bates huskily. 

He rose and walked toward a heap on the 
ground covered by a blanket. He started to 
lift the blanket, hesitated, and finally turned 
away. Under the blanket lay TuUjr's brother, 
shot the night before by Kent. 



192 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

" Guess we'd better wait till Tully comes/' 
said Carrots uneasily. Bates and Kent had 
been campmates. An hour later Tully walked 
into camp. 

He spoke to no one that day. In the morn- 
ing Bates found him down on the coast dig- 
ging, and said: " Hello, Tullyl Guess we ain't 
much hell on lynching '' 

" Naw/' said Tully. " Git a spade/' 

" Goin' to plant him there? '' 

«Yep.'' 

** Where he kin hear them waves? '* 

*^Yep.'' 

"Purtyspot." 

"Yep.'' 

"Which way will he face?" 

"Where he kin watch fur that damned 
canoe 1 " cried Tully fiercely. 

"He — ^he can't see," ventured Bates im- 
easily. " He's dead, ain't he? " 

" He'll heave up that there sand when the 
canoe comes back! An' it's a-comin'l An' 
Bud Kent'll be in it, dead or alive! Git a 
spade! " 

The pale light of superstition flickered in 
Bates's eyes. He hesitated. 

" The — ^the dead can't see," he began; " kin 
they?" 

Tully turned a distorted face toward him. 

"Yer lie!" he roared. "My brother kin 
see, dead or livin'I An' he'll see the hanging 



THE KEY TO GBIEF. 193 

of Bud Kent I An' he'll git up outer the grave 
fur to see it, Bill BatesI Fm tellin' ye! Vm 
tellin' ye I Deep as Fll plant him, he'll heave 
that there sand and call to me, when the canoe 
comes in! Fll hear him; Fll be here! An' 
we'll live to see the hangin' of Bud Kent! " 

About sundown they planted 1x111/8 
brother, face to the sea. 

II. 

On the Key to Grief the green waves rub 
all day. White at the summit, black at the 
base, the shafted rocks rear splintered pinna- 
cles, slanting like channel buoys. On the pol- 
ished pillars sea birds brood — ^white-winged, 
bright-eyed sea birds, that nestle and preen 
and flap and clatter their orange-coloured beaks 
when the sifted spray drives and drifts across 
the reef. 

As the sun rose, painting crimson streaks 
criss-cross over the waters, the sea birds sidled 
together, huddling row on row, steeped in downy 
drowse. 

Where the sxm of noon burnished the sea, 
an opal wave washed, listless, noiseless; a sea 
bird stretched one listless wing. 

And into the silence of the waters a canoe 
glided, bronzed by the sunlight, jewelled by the 
salt drops stringing from prow to thwart, sea- 
weed a-trail in the diamond-flashing wake, and 
in the bow a man dripping with sweat. 



194 THE MYSTEKY OF CHOICE. 

Up rose the gulls, sweeping in circles, turn- 
ing, turning oyer rock and sea, and their 
clamour filled the sky, starting little rippling 
echoes among the rocks. 

The canoe grated on a shelf of ebony; the 
seaweed rocked and washed; the little sea crabs 
sheered sideways, down, down into limpid depths 
of greenest shadows. Such was the coming 
of Bud Kent to the Key to Grief. 

He drew the canoe halfway up the shelf 
of rock and sat down, breathing heavily, one 
brown arm across the bow. For an hour he 
sat there. The sweat dried under his eyes. The 
sea birds came back, filling the air with soft 
querulous notes. 

There was a livid mark around his neck, a 
red, raw circle. The salt wind stung it; the 
sun burned it into his fiesh like a collar of red- 
hot steel. He touched it at times; once he 
washed it with cold salt water. 

Far in the north a curtain of mist hung on 
the sea, dense, motionless as the fog on the 
Grand Banks. He never moved his eyes from 
it; he knew what it was. Behind it lay the 
Island of Grief. 

All the year roxmd the Island of Grief is 
hidden by the banks of mist, ramparts of dead 
white fog encircling it on every side. Ships give 
it wide berth. Some speak of warm springs on 
the island whose waters flow far out to sea, ris- 
ing in steam eternally. 



THE KEY TO GRIEF. 195 

The pelt hunter had come back with tales 
of forests and deer and flowers everywhere; 
but he had been drinking much, and much was 
forgiven him. 

The body of the college youth tossed up in 
the cove on the mainland was battered out of 
recognition, but some said, when found, one 
hand clutched a crimson blossom half wilted, 
but broad as a sap pan. 

So Kent lay motionless beside his canoe, 
burned with thirst, every nerve vibrating, 
thinking of all ihese things. It was not fear 
that whitened the firm flesh under the tan; it 
was the fear of fear. He must not think — ^he 
must throttle dread; his eyes must never falter, 
his head never turn from that wall of mist 
across the sea. With set teeth he crushed back 
terror; with glittering eyes he looked into the 
hollow eyes of fright. And so he conquered 
fear. 

He rose. The sea birds whirled up into the 
sky, pitching, tossing, screaming, till the sharp 
flapping of their pinions set the snapping echoes 
flying among the rocks. 

Under the canoe's sharp prow the kelp 
bobbed and dipped and parted; the sunlit 
waves ran out ahead, glittering, dancing. 
SplashI splash! bow and stem! And now he 
knelt again, and the polished paddle swung and 
dipped, and swept and swung and dipped again. 

Far behind^ the clamour of the sea birds 



196 THE MYSTBKY OP CHOICE. 

lingered in his ears^ till the mellow dip of the 
paddle drowned all sound and the sea was a sea 
of gileQce. 

No wind came to cool the hot sweat on 
cheek and breast. The snn blazed a path 
of flame before him, and he followed out into 
the waste of waters. The still ocean divided 
imder the bows and rippled innocently away 
on either side, tinkling, foaming, sparkling like 
the current in a woodland brook. He looked 
around at the world of flattened water, and the 
fear of fear rose up and gripped his throat 
again. Then he lowered his head, like a tor- 
tured bull, and shook the fear of fear from his 
throat, and drove the paddle into the sea as a 
butcher stabs, to the hilt. 

So at last he came to the wall of mist. It 
was thin at first, thin and cool, but it thickened 
and grew warmer, and the fear of fear dragged 
at his head, but he would not look behind. 

Into the fog the canoe shot; the gray water 
ran by, high as the gunwales, oily, silent. Shapes 
flickered across the bows, pillars of mist that 
rode the waters, robed in films of tattered 
shadows. Gigantic forms towered to dizzy 
heights above him, shaking out shredded 
shrouds of cloud. The vast draperies of the 
fog swayed and hung and trembled as he 
brushed them; the white twilight deepened to 
a sombre gloom. And now it grew thinner; 
the fog became a mist, and the mist a haze, and 



THE KEY TO OBIEF. I97 

the haze floated away and vanished into the 
hlue of the heavens. 

All around lay a sea of pearl and sapphire, 
lapping, lapping on a silver shoal. 

So he came to the Island of Grief. 



On the silver shoal the waves washed and 
washed, breaking like crushed opals where the 
sands sang with the humming froth. 

Troops of little shore birds, wading on the 
shoal, tossed their sun-tipped wings and scut- 
tled inland, where, dappled with shadow from 
the fringing forest, the white beach of the 
island stretched. 

The water all around was shallow, limpid 
as crystal, and he saw the ribbed sand shining 
on the bottom, where purple seaweed floated, 
and delicate sea creatures darted and swarmed 
and scattered again at the dip of his paddle. 

like velvet rubbed on velvet the canoe 
brushed across the sand. He staggered to his 
feet, stumbled out, dragged the canoe high up 
imder the trees, turned it bottom upward, and 
sank beside it, face downward in the sand. 
Sleep came to drive away the fear of fear, but 
hxmger, thirst, and fever fought with sleep, and 
he dreamed — dreamed of a rope that sawed his 
neck, of the flght in the woods, and the shots. 
He dreamed, too, of the camp, of his forty 



198 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

pounds of spruce gum, of Tully, and of Bates. 
He dreamed of the fire and the smoke-scorched 
kettle, of the foul odour of musty bedding, of the 
greasy cards, and of his own new pack, hoarded 
for weeks to please the others. All this he 
dreamed, lying there face downward in the 
sand; but he did not dream of the face of the 
dead. 

The shadows of the leaves moved on his 
blonde head, crisp with clipped curls. A but- 
terfly flitted around him, alighting now on 
his legs, now on the back of his bronzed hands. 
All the afternoon the bees hung droning among 
the wildwood blossoms; the leaves above scarcely 
rustled; the shore birds brooded along the 
water's edge; the thin tide, sleeping on the 
sand, mirrored the sky. 

Twilight paled the zenith; a breeze moved 
in the deeper woods; a star glimmered, went 
out, glimmered again, faded, and glimmered. 

Night came. A moth darted to and fro 
under the trees; a beetle hummed around a 
heap of seaweed and fell scrambling in the 
sand. Somewhere among the trees a sound 
had become distinct, the song of a little brook, 
melodious, interminable. He heard it in his 
dream; it threaded all his dreams like a needle 
of silver, and like a needle it pricked him — 
pricked his dry throat and cracked lips. It 
could not awake him; the cool night swathed 
him head and foot. 



THE KEY TO GRIEF. 199 

Toward dawn a bird woke up and piped. 
Other birds stirred^ restless^ half awakened; a 
gull spread a cramped wing on the shore, 
preened its feathers, scratched its tufted neck, 
and took two drowsy steps toward the sea. 

The sea breeze stirred out behind the mist 
bank; it raised the feathers on the sleeping 
gulls; it set the leaves whispering. A twig 
snapped, broke off, and fell. Kent stirred, 
sighed, trembled, and awoke. 

The first thing he heard was the song of 
the brook, and he stumbled straight into the 
woods. There it lay, a thin, deep stream in 
the gray morning light, and he stretched him- 
self beside it and laid his cheek in it. A bird 
drank in the pool, too — a little fluffy bird, 
bright-eyed and fearless. 

His knees were firmer when at last he rose, 
heedless of the drops that beaded lips and chin. 
With his knife he dug and scraped at some 
white roots that hung half meshed in the bank 
of the brook, and when he had cleaned them 
in the pool he ate them. 

The sun stained the sky when he went down 
to the canoe, but the eternal curtain of fog, far 
out at sea, hid it as yet from sight. 

He lifted the canoe, bottom upwards, to his 
head, and, paddle and pole in either hand, car- 
ried it into the forest. 

After he had set it down he stood a moment, 
opening and shutting his knife. Then he looked 
14 



200 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

up into the trees. There were birds there, if 
he could get at them. He looked at the brook. 
There were the prints of his fingers in the sand; 
there, too, was the print of something else — a 
deer's pointed hoof. 

He had nothing but his knife. He opened 
it again and looked at it. 

That day he dug for clams and ate them 
raw. He waded out into the shallows, too, and 
jabbed at fish with his setting pole, but hit 
nothing except a yellow crab. 

Fire was what he wanted. He hacked and 
chipped at fiinty-looking pebbles, and scraped 
tinder from a stick of sun-dried driftwood. His 
knuckles bled, but no fire came. 

That night he heard deer in the woods, and 
could not sleep for thinking, until the dawn 
came up behind the wall of mist, and he rose 
with it to drink his fill at the brook and tear 
raw clams with his white teeth. Again he 
fought for fire, craving it as he had never 
craved water, but his knuckles bled, and the 
knife scraped on the flint in vain. 

His mind, perhaps, had suffered somewhat. 
The white beach seemed to rise and fall like a 
white carpet on a gusty hearth. The birds, 
too, that ran along the sand, seemed big and 
juicy, like partridges; and he chased them, 
hurKng shells and bits of driftwood at them 
till he could scarcely keep his feet for the ris- 
ing, plunging beach — or carpet, whichever it 



THE KEY TO GRIEF^ 201 

was. That night the deer aroused him at inter- 
vals. He heard them splashing and grunting 
and crackling along the brook. Once he arose 
and stole after them, knife in hand, till a false 
step into the brook awoke him to his folly, and 
he felt his way back to the canoe, trembling. 

Morning came, and again he drank at the 
brook, lying on the sand where countless heart- 
shaped hoofs had passed leaving clean imprints; 
and again he ripped the raw clams from their 
shells and swallowed them, whimpering. 

All day long the white beach rose and fell 
and heaved and flattened imder his bright dry 
eyes. He chased the shore birds at times, till 
the unsteady beach tripped him up and he fell 
full length in the sand. Then he would rise 
moaning, and creep into the shadow of the 
wood, and watch the little song-birds in the 
branches, moaning, always moaning. 

His hands, sticky with blood, hacked steel 
and flint together, but so feebly that now even 
the cold sparks no longer came. 

He began to fear the advancing night; he 
dreaded to hear the big warm deer among the 
thickets. Fear clutched him suddenly, and he 
lowered his head and set his teeth and shook 
fear from his throat again. 

Then he started aimlessly into the woods, 
crowding past bushes, scraping trees, treading 
on moss and twig and mouldy stump, his 
bruised hands swinging, always swinging. 



202 THE MYSTEEY OF CHOICE. 

The sun set in the mist as he came out of the 
woods on to another beach — a warm, soft beach, 
crimsoned by the glow in the evening clouds. 

And on the sand at his feet lay a young girl 
asleep, swathed in the silken garment of her 
own black hair, round limbed, brown, smooth 
as the bloom on the tawny beach. 

A gull flapped overhead, screaming. Her 
eyes, deeper than night, unclosed. Then her 
lips parted in a cry, soft with sleep, " Ih6! '* 

She rose, rubbing her velvet eyes. " Ih6I ** 
she cried in wonder; " Infthl '' 

The gilded sand settled around her little 
feet. Her cheeks crimsoned. 

" E-h6I E-h6I '' she whispered, and hid her 
face in her hair. 



IV. 

The bridge of the stars spans the sky seas; 
the sun and the moon are the travellers who 
pass over it. This was also known in the lodges 
of the Isantee, hundreds of years ago. Chask6 
told it to H^rpam, and when HSrpam knew 
he told it to Hap6da; and so the knowledge 
spread to Harka, and from Winona to Weh&rka, 
up and down, across and ever across, woof and 
web, until it came to the Island of Grief. And 
how? God knows! 

Weharka, prattling in the tules, may have 
told Ne-ka; and Ne-kft, high in the November 



THE KEY TO GRIEF. 

clouds, may have told Kay-6shk, who told it to 
Shinge-bis, who told it to Ske6-skah, who told 
it to S6-86-Kah. 

Ih6I Inahl Behold the wonder of iti And 
this is the fate of all knowledge that comes to 
the Island of Grief. 

As the red glow died in the dqr, and the 
sand swam in shadows, the girl parted the silken 
curtains of her hair and looked at him. 

" Eh6I *' she whispered again in soft delight. 

For now it was plain to her that he was the 
sunt He had crossed the bridge of stars in the 
blue twilight; he had comel 

"E.t6I'' 

She stepped nearer, shivering, faint with 
the ecstasy of this holy miracle wrought be- 
fore her. 

He was the SunI His blood streaked the 
sky at dawn; his blood stained the clouds at 
even. In his eyes the blue of the sky still 
lingered, smothering two blue stars; and his 
body was as white as the breast of the Moon. 

She opened both arms, hands timidly 
stretched, palm upward. Her face was raised 
to his, her eyes slowly closed; the deep-fringed 
lids trembled. 

like a young priestess she stood, motionless 
save for the sudden quiver of a limb, a quick 
pulse-flutter in the rounded throat. And so 
she worshipped, naked and unashamed, even 



^04 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

dfter he, reeling, fell heavily forward on his 
face; even when the evening breeze stealing 
over the sands stirred the hair on his head, as 
winds stir the fur of a dead animal in the 
dust. 

When the morning sun peered over the wall 
of mist, asd she saw it was the sun, and she 
saw him, flung on the sand at her feet, then 
she knew that he was a man, only a man, pallid 
as death and smeared with blood. 

And yet — ^miracle of miracles! — ^the divine 
wonder in her eyes deepened, and her body 
seemed to swoon, and fall a-trembling, and 
swoon again. 

For, although it was but a man who lay at 
her feet, it had been easier for her to look upon 
a god. 

He dreamed that he breathed fire — ^fire, that 
he craved as he had never craved water. 
Mad with delirium, he knelt before the flames, 
rubbing his torn hands, washing them in the 
crimson-scented flames. He had water, too, 
cool scented water, that sprayed his burning 
flesh, that washed in his eyes, his hair, his 
throat. After that came hunger, a fierce rend- 
ing agony, that scorched and clutched and tore 
at his entrails; but that, too, died away, and he 
dreamed that he had eaten and all his flesh was 
warm. Then he dreamed that he slept; and 
when he slept he dreamed no more. 



THE KEY TO GKIEF. 205 

One day he awoke and found her stretched 
beside him^ soft pakns tightly closed^ smiling, 
as^ 



Now the days began to run more swiftly 
than the tide along the tawny beach; and the 
nights, star-dusted and blue, came and van- 
ished and returned, only to exhale at dawn like 
perfume from a violet. 

They counted hours as they counted the 
golden bubbles, winking with a million eyes 
along the foam-flecked shore; and the hours 
ended, and began, and glimmered, iridescent, 
and ended as bubbles end in a tiny rainbow 
haze. 

There was still fire in the world; it flashed 
up at her touch and where she chose. A bow 
strung with the silk of her own hair, an arrow 
winged like a sea bird and tipped with shell, 
a line from the silver tendon of a deer, a hook 
of polished bone — ^thcse were the mysteries he 
learned, and learned them laughing, her silken 
head bent close to his. 

The first night that the bow was wrought 
and the glossy string attuned, she stole into 
the moonlit forest to the brook; and there they 
stood, whispering, listening, and whispering, 
though neither understood the voice they loved. 

In the deeper woods, Kaug, the porcupine, 
scraped and snuffed. They heard Wab6se, the 



THE MYSTEEY OF CHOICE. 

rabbit; pit-a-pat, pit-a-pat, loping across dead 
leaves in the moonlight. Ske6-skah, the wood- 
duck, sailed past, noiseless, gorgeous as a float- 
ing blossom. 

Out on the ocean's placid silver, Shinge-bis, 
the diver, shook the scented silence with his 
idle laughter, till Kay-6shk, the gray gull, 
stirred in his slumber. There came a sudden 
ripple in the stream, a mellow splash, a soft 
sound on the sand. 

'ah6I Behold!'* 

"I see nothing.'' 

The beloved voice was only a wordless mel- 
ody to her. 

"Ih61 Ta-hinca, the red deer! E-h6l The 
buck will foUowI " 

" Ta-hinca," he repeated, notching the ar- 
row. 

"E-t61 Ta-md6kal" 

So he drew the arrow to the head, and the 
gray gull feathers brushed his ear, and the dark- 
ness hummed with the harmony of the singing 
string. 

Thus died Ta-md6ka, the buck deer of seven 
prongs. 

VI. 

As an apple tossed spinmng into the air, 
so spim the world above the hand that tossed 
it into space. 

And one day in early spring, S4-s6-Eah, the 



THE KEY TO QBIEF. 207 

Tobin^ awoke at dawn^ and saw a girl at the foot 
of the blossoming tree holding a babe cradled 
in the silken sheets of her hair. 

At its feeble cry, Kaug, the porcupine, 
raised his qtdlled head. Wab6se, the rabbit, 
sat still with palpitating sides. E!ay-6shk, the 
gray gull, tiptoed along the beach. 

Kent knelt with one bronzed arm around 
them both. 

" Ih6I Infihl '' whispered the girl, and held 
the babe up in the rosy flames of dawn. 

But Kent trembled as he looked, and his 
eyes filled. On the pale green moss their 
shadows lay — ^three shadows. But the shadow 
of the babe was white as froth. 

Because it was the firstborn son, they named 
it Chask6; and the girl sang as she cradled it 
there in the silken vestments of her hair; all 
day long in the sunshine she sang: 

Wfi-wa, wfi-wa, wS-we — je&; 
Kah-w^en, nee-zh6ka Ke-diaus-^ 
Ke-gfih nau-wSi, ne-m^go SVe^n, 
Ke-b£un, ne-bfiun, ne-dfiun-is Ms, 
E-we wS-wa, wS-we— ydl ; 
E-we w&-wa, w&-we— ye^ 

Out in the calm ocean, Shinge-bis, the 
diver, listened, preening his satin breast in si- 
lence. In the forest, Ta-hinca, the red deer, 
turned her delicate head to the wind. 

That night Kent thought of the dead, for 



208 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

the first time since he had come to the Key of 
Grief. 

"Ak6-u! ak6-ul^* chirped S6-s6-Kah, the 
robin. But the dead never come again. 

"Beloved, sit close to us/^ whispered the 
girl, watching his troubled eyes. "Ma-c4nte 
mas6ca.^' 

But he looked at the babe and its white 
shadow on the moss, and he only sighed: " Ma- 
cdiite mas^ca, belovedl Death sits watching 
us across the sea.*' 

Now for the first time he knew more than 
the fear of fear; he knew fear. And with fear 
name grief. 

He never before knew that grief lay hidden 
there in the forest. Now he knew it. Still, that 
happiness, eternally reborn when two small 
hands reached up around his neck, when feeble 
fingers clutched his hand — ^that happiness that 
S6-s6-Kah understood, chirping to his brood- 
ing mate — ^that Ta-md6ka knew, licking his 
dappled fawns — ^that happiness gave him heart 
to meet grief calmly, in dreams or in the forest 
depths, and it helped him to look into the hol- 
low eyes of fear. 

He often thought of the camp now; of 
Bates, his blanket mate; of Dyce, whose wrist 
he had broken with a blow; of TuUy, whose 
brother he had shot. He even seemed to hear 
the shot, the sudden report among the hem- 
locks; again he saw the haze of smoke, he 



THE KEY TO QBIEF. 209 

caught a glimpse of a tall form falling through 
the bushes. 

He remembered every minute incident of 
the trial: Bates's hand laid on his shoidder; 
Tully, red-bearded and wild-eyed, demanding 
his death; while Dyce spat and spat and smoked 
and kicked at the blackened log-ends projecting 
from the fire. He remembered, too, the ver- 
dict, and Tully^s terrible laugh; and the new 
jute rope that they stripped off the market- 
sealed gum packs. 

He thought of these things, sometimes wad- 
ing out on the shoals, shell-tipped fish spear 
poised: at such times he would miss his fish. 
He thought of it sometimes when he knelt by 
the forest stream listening for Ta-hinca's splash 
among the cresses: at such moments the feath- 
ered shaft whistled far from the mark, and Ta- 
md6ka stamped and snorted till even the white 
fisher, stretched on a rotting log, flattened his 
whiskers and stole away into the f oresf s black- 
est depths. 

When the child was a year old, hour for hour 
notched at sunset and sunrise, it prattled with 
the birds, and called to Ne-KA, the wild goose, 
who called again to the child from the sky: 
" Northwardl northward, beloved! '* 

When winter came— there is no frost on the 
Island of Grief — ^Ne-Kft, the wild goose, passing 
high in the clouds, called: " Southwardl south- 
ward, belovedl'' And the child answer^ in 



210 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

a soft whisper of an unknown tongue^ till the 
mother shivered, and covered it with her silken 
hair. 

"0 beloved!'' said the girl, "Chaskfi calls 
to all things living — ^to Kaug, the porcupine, 
to Wab6se, to Kay-6shk, the gray gull — he calls, 
and they understand.'' 

Kent bent and looked into her eyes. 

"Hush, beloved; it is not that I fear." 

"Then what, beloved?" 

"His shadow. It is white as surf foam. 
And at night — ^I — ^I have seen ^" 

"Oh, what?" 

" The air about him aglow like a pale rose." 

" Ma dUit6 mas^. The earth alone lasts. 
I speak as one dying — ^I know, beloved! " 

Her voice died away like a summer wind. 

"Beloved!" he cried. 

But there before him she was changing; 
the air grew misty, and her hair wavered like 
shreds of fog, and her slender form swayed, and 
faded, and swerved, like the mist above a pond. 

In her arms the babe was a figure of mist, 
rosy, vague as a breath on a mirror. 

" The earth alone lasts. In&hl It is the 
end, beloved! " 

The words came from th^ mist — a mist as 
formless as the ether — ^a mist that drove in and 
crowded him, that came from the sea, from 
the clouds, from the earth at his feet. Faint 
with terror, he staggered forward calling, " Be- 



THE KEY TO GRIEP. 211 

levedl And thou, Chaski, beloved! Ak6 u! 
Ak6u!'' 

Far out at sea a rosy star glimmered an in- 
stant in the mist and went out. 

A sea bird screamed, soaring over the waste 
of fog-smothered waters. Again he saw the 
rosy star; it came nearer; its reflection glim- 
mered in the water. 

"Chaskil^' he cried. 

He heard a voice, dull in the choking mist. 

** beloved, I am here! ^^ he called again. 

There was a sound on the shoal, a flicker in 
the fog, the flare of a torch, a face white, livid, 
terrible — the face of the dead. 

He fell upon his knees; he closed his eyes 
and opened them. Tully stood beside him with 
a coil of rope. 

Ih6I Behold the end! The earth alone 
lasts. The sand, the opal wave on the golden 
beach, the sea of sapphire, the dusted starlight, 
the wind, and love, shall die. Death also shall 
die, and lie on the shores of the skies like the 
bleached skull there on the Key to Grief, pol- 
ished, empty, with its teeth embedded in the 
sand. 



A MATTEE OF INTEREST. 



A MATTER OF INTEREST. 

He that knows not, and knows not that he knows not, is 

a fooL Shnn him. 
He that knows not, and knows that he knows not, is 

simple. Teach him. 
He that knows, and knows not that he knows, is asleep. 

Wake him. 
He that knows, and knows that he knows, is wise. 

Follow him. Arabian Proverb, 

I. 

Mtjch as I disKke it, I am obliged to include 
this story in a volume devoted to fiction: I have 
attempted to tell it as an absolutely true story, 
but until three months ago, when the indis- 
putable proofs were placed before the British 
Association by Professor James Holroyd, I was 
regarded as an impostor. Now that the Smith- 
sonian Institute in Washington, the Philadel- 
phia Zoological Society, and the Natural His- 
tory Museum of New York city, are convinced 
that the story is truthful and accurate in every 
particular, I prefer to tell it my own way. Pro- 
fessor Holroyd urges me to do this, although 
Professor Bruce Stoddard, of Columbia College, 
15 215 



216 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

is now at work upon a pamphlet, to be published 
the latter part of next month, describing scien- 
tifically the extraordinary discovery which, to 
the shame of the United States, was first ac- 
cepted and recognised in England. 

Now, having no technical ability concern- 
ing the affair in question, and having no knowl- 
edge of either comparative anatomy or zoology, 
I am perhaps unfitted to tell this story. But 
the story is true; the episode occurred imder 
my own eyes — ^here, within a few hours' sail of 
the Battery. And as I was one of the first per- 
sons to verify what has long been a theory 
among scientists, and, moreover, as the result 
of Professor Hoboyd's discovery is to be placed 
on exhibition in Madison Square Garden on the 
twentieth of next month, I have decided to tell, 
as simply as I am able, exactly what occurred. 

I first wrote out the story on April 1, 1896. 
The North American Eeview, the Popular Sci- 
ence Monthly, the Scientific American, Nature, 
Forest and Stream, and the Fossiliferous Maga- 
zine in turn rejected it; some curtly inform- 
ing me that fiction had no place in their col- 
umns. When I attempted to explain that it 
was not fiction, the editors of these periodicals 
either maintained a contemptuous silence, or 
bluntly notified me that my literary services 
and opinions were not desired. But finally, 
when several publishers offered to take the story 
as fiction, I cut short all negotiations and de- 



A MATTEB aF INTEBBST. 217 

cided to publish it myself. Where I am known 
at all^ it is my misfortune to be known as a 
writer of fiction. This makes it impossible for 
me to receive a hearing from a scientific audi- 
ence. I regret it bitterly, because now, when it 
is too late, I am prepared to prove certain sci- 
entific matters of interest, and to produce the 
proofs. In this case, however, I am fortunate, 
for nobody can dispute the existence of a thing 
when the bodily proof is exhibited as evi- 
dence. 

This is the story; and if I write it as I write 
fiction, it is because I do not know how to write 
it otherwise. 

I was walking along the beach below Fine 
Inlet, on the south shore of Long Island. The 
railroad and telegraph station is at West Oyster 
Bay. Everybody who has travelled on the Long 
Island Bailroad knows the station, but few, 
perhaps, know Pine Inlet. Duck shooters, of 
course, are familiar with it; but as there are no 
hotels there, and nothing to see except salt 
meadow, salt creek, and a strip of dune and 
sand, the summer-squatting pubUc may proba^ 
bly be unaware of its existence. The local name 
for the place is Pine Inlet; the maps give its 
name as Sand Point, I believe, but anybody at 
West Oyster Bay can direct you to it. Captain 
McPeek, who keeps the West Oyster Bay House, 
drives duck shooters there in winter. It lies 
five miles southeast from West Oyster Bay. 



218 THE MYSTBBY OF CHOICE. 

I had walked over that afternoon from Cap^ 
tain McPeek's. There was a reason for my go- 
ing to Pine Inlet — ^it embarrasses me to explain 
it, but the truth is I meditated writing an ode 
to the ocean. It was out of the question to 
write it in West Oyster Bay, with the whistle of 
locomotives in my ears. I knew that Pine In- 
let was one of the loneliest places on the Atlan- 
tic coast; it is out of sight of everything except 
leagues of gray ocean. Barely one might make 
out fishing smacks drifting across the horizon. 
Summer squatters never visited it; sportsmen 
shunned it, except in winter. Therefore, as 1 
was about to do a bit of poetry, I thought that 
Pine Inlet was the spot for the deed. So I went 
there. 

As I was strolling along the beach, biting 
my pencil reflectively, tremendously impressed 
by the solitude and the solemn thunder of the 
surf, a thought occurred to me: how unpleas- 
ant it would be if I suddenly stumbled* on a 
summer boarder. As this joyless impossibility 
flitted across my mind, I rounded a bleak sand 
dune. 

A summer girl stood directly in my path. 

If I jumped, I think the young lady has 
pardoned me by this time. She ought to, be- 
cause she also started, and said something in a 
very faint voice. What she said was ^^ Oh! '* 

She stared at me as though I had just 
crawled up out of the sea to bite her. I don't 



A MATTEB OP INTEREST. 219 

know what my own expression resembled, but 
I have been given to understand it was idi- 
otic. 

Now I perceived, after a few moments, that 
the yoimg lady was frightened, and I knew I 
ought to say something civil. So I said, " Are 
there any mosquitoes here? '' 

"No,^' she replied, with a slight quiver in 
her voice; "I have only seen one, and it was 
biting somebody else.** 

I looked foolish; the conversation seemed 
so futile, and the young lady appeared to be 
more nervous than before. I had an impulse 
to say, " Do not run; I have breakfasted,** for 
she seemed to be meditating a plunge into the 
breakers. What I did say was: "I did not 
know anybody was here. I do not intend to 
intrude. I come from Captain McPeek*s, and 
I am writing an ode to the ocean.** After I 
had said this it seemed to ring in my ears like, 
" I come from Table Mountain, and my name is 
Truthf^l James.** 

I glanced timidly at her. 

** She*s thinking of the same thing,** said I 
to myself. *^ What an ass I must appear! ** 

However, the yoimg lady seemed to be a 
trifle reassured. I noticed she drew a sigh of 
relief and looked at my shoes. She looked 
so long that it made me suspicious, and I also 
examined my shoes. They seemed to be fairly 
respectable. 



THE MYSTEKY OF CHOICE. 

" I — ^I am sorry/* she said, " but would you 
mind not walking on the beach? '* 

This was sudden. I had intended to retire 
and leave the beach to her, but I did not fancy 
being driven away so abruptly. 

"I was about to withdraw, madam,'* said 
I, bowing stiffly; *'I beg you will pardon any 
inconvenience ^^ 

** Dear me! ** she cried, " you don't under- 
stand. I do not — ^I would not think for a 
moment of asking you to leave Pine Inlet. I 
merely ventured to request you to walk on 
the dunes. I am so afraid that your footprints 
may obliterate the impressions that my father 
is studying.** 

" Oh! ** said I, looking about me as though 
I had been caught in the middle of a flower- 
bed; " really I did not notice any impressions. 
Impressions of what — ^if I may be permitted? ** 

"I don*t know,** she said, smiling a little 
at my awkward pose. " If you step this way in 
a straight line you can do no damage.** 

I did as she bade me. I suppose my move- 
ments resembled the gait of a wet peacock. 
Possibly they recalled the delicate manoeuvres 
of the kangaroo. Anyway, she laughed. 

This seriously annoyed me. I had been at 
a disadvantage; I walk well enough when let 
alone. 

" You can scarcely expect,** said I, " that a 
man absorbed in his own ideas could notice im- 



A MATTER OP INTEREST. 221 

pressions on the sand. I trust I have obliter- 
ated nothing.*' 

As I said this I looked back at the long line 
of footprints stretching away in prospective 
across the sand. They were my own. How 
large they lookedl Was that what she was 
laughing at? 

" I wish to explain/* she said gravely, look- 
ing at the point of her parasol. "I am very 
sorry to be obliged to warn you — ^to ask you to 
forego the pleasure of strolling on a beach that 
does not belong to me. Perhaps/* she contin- 
ued, in sudden alarm, " perhaps this beach be- 
longs to you?** 

'' The beach? Oh, no,** I said. 

" But — ^but you were going to write poems 
about it?** 

" Only one — and that does not necessitate 
owning the beach. I have observed,** said I 
frankly, "that the people who own nothing 
write many poems about it.** 

She looked at me seriously. 

" I write many poems/* I added. 

She laughed doubtfully. 

" Would you rather I went away? ** I asked 
politely. 

"I? Why, no — ^I mean that you may do 
as you please — except please do not walk on the 
beach.** 

"Then I do not alarm you by my pres- 
ence?** I inquired. My clothes were a bit 



THE MYSTEBY OP CHOICE. 

ancient. I wore them shooting, sometimes. 
"My family is respectable/^ I added; and I 
told her my name. 

"Oh! Then you wrote * Culled Cowslips' 
and * Faded Fig-Leaves/ and you imitate Mae- 
terlinck, and you Oh, I know lots of peo- 
ple that you know; '* she cried with every symp- 
tom of relief; " and you know my brother.'^ 

"I am the author,'* said I coldly, "of 
* Culled Cowslips,' but ^ Faded Fig-Leaves ' was 
an earlier work, which I no longer recognise, 
and I should be grateful to you if you would 
be kind enough to deny that I ever imitated 
Maeterlinck. Possibly,'' I added, " he imitates 
me." 

"Now, do you know," she said, "I was 
afraid of you at first? Papa is digging in the 
salt meadows nearly a mile away." 

It was hard to bear. 

" Can you not see," said I, " that I am wear- 
ing a shooting coat?" 

" I do see — ^now; but it is so — so old," she 
pleaded. 

" It is a shooting coat all the same," I said 
bitterly. 

She was very quiet, and I saw she was sorry. 

"Never mind," I said magnanimously, 
*^you probably are not familiar with sporting 
goods. If I Imew your name I should ask per- 
mission to present myself." 

" Why, I am Daisy Holroyd," she said. 



A MATTEB OP INTEBEST. 223 

''What! Jack Holroyd's Utile sister? '' 

" Little! ^^ she cried. 

" I didnH mean that/* said I. " You know 
that your brother and I were great friends in 
Paris '' 

" I know/* she said significantly. 

'' Ahem! Of course/* I said, " Jack and I 
were inseparable ^^ 

'' Except when shut in separate cells/* said 
Miss Holroyd coldly. 

This unfeeling allusion to the unfortunate 
termination of a Latin-Quarter celebration hurt 
me. 

" The police/* said I, " were too officious.** 

" So Jack says/* replied Miss Holroyd de- 
murely. 

We had unconsciously moved on along the 
sand hills, side by side, as we spoke. 

" To think,** I repeated, " that I should meet 
Jack*s little '' 

"Please,** she said, "you are only three 
years my senior.** 

She opened the sunshade and tipped it over 
one shoulder. It was white, and had spots and 
posies on it. 

" Jack sends us every new book you write,** 
she observed. "I do not approve of some 
things you write.** 

" Modem school/* I mumbled. 

"That is no excuse/* she said severely; 
'' Anthony TroUope didn*t do it/* 



THE MYSTEEY OP CHOICB. 

The foam spume from the breakers was 
drifting across the dunes, and the little tip-up 
snipe ran along the beach and teetered and 
whistled and spread their white-barred wings 
for a low, straight flight across the shingle, 
only to tip and skeep and sail on again. The 
salt sea wind whistled and curled through the 
crested waves, blowing in perfumed puffs across 
thickets of sweet bay and cedar. As we passed 
through the crackling juicy-stemmed marsh 
weed myriads of fiddler crabs raised their fore- 
claws in warning and backed away, rustling, 
through the reeds, aggressive, protesting. 

*^Like millions of pigmy Ajaxes defying 
the lightning,'^ I said. 

Miss Holroyd laughed. 

" Now I never imagined that authors were 
clever except in print,^* she said. 

She was a most extraordinary girl. 

" I suppose,'^ she observed after a moment's 
silence — "I suppose I am taking you to my 
father.^' 

"DeUghted!'' I mumbled, "ffm! I had 
the honour of meeting Professor Holroyd in 
Paris.'' 

"Yes; he bailed you and Jack out," said 
Miss Holroyd serenely. 

The silence was too painful to last. 

"Captain McPeek is an interesting man," 
I said. I spoke more loudly than I intended; 
I may have been nervous. 



A MATTER OP INTEBEST. 225 

** Yes/' said Daisy Holroyd, " but he has a 
most singular hotel clerk/* 

" You mean Mr. Frisby? "" 

^^do.^ 

^Yes," I admitted, *^Mr. Frisby is queer. 
He was once a bill-poster/' 

"I know itf exclaimed Daisy Holroyd, 
with some heat. ^^ He ruins landscapes when- 
ever he has an opportunity. Do you know that 
he has a passion for bill-posting? He has; he 
posts bills for the pure pleasure of it, just as you 
play golf, or tennis, or billiards.*' 

" But he's a hotel clerk now," I said; " no- 
body employs him to post bills/' 

^* I know it! He does it all by himself for 
the pure pleasure of it. Papa has engaged him 
to come down here for two weeks, and I dread 
it," said the girL 

What Professor Holroyd might want of Fris- 
by I had not the faintest notion. I suppose 
Miss Holroyd noticed the bewilderment in my 
face, for she laughed, and nodded her head 
twice. 

** Not only Mr. Frisby, but Captain McPeek 
also," she said. 

"You don't mean to say that Gaptain 
McPeek is going to close his hotell" I ex- 
claimed. 

My trunk was there. It contained guaran- 
tees of my respectability. 

"Oh, no; his wife will keep it open," re- 



226 THE MYSTEEY OP CHOICE. 

plied the girl. ^* Look! you can see papa now. 
He's digging.*' 

*' Where?'' I hlurted out. 

I remembered Professor Holroyd as a prim, 
spectacled gentleman, with close-cut, snowy 
beard and a clerical allure. The man I saw 
digging wore green goggles, a jersey, a battered 
sou'wester, and hip-boots of rubber. He was 
delving in the muck of the salt meadow, his 
face streaming with perspiration, his boots and 
jersey splashed with unpleasant-looking mud. 
He glanced up as we approached, shading his 
eyes with a sunburnt hand. 

"Papa, dear," said Miss Holroyd, "here 
is Jack's friend, whom you bailed out of 
Mazas." 

The introduction was startling. I turned 
crimson with mortification. The professor was 
very decent about it; he called me by name at 
once. 

When he said this he looked at his spade. 
It was clear that he considered me a nuisance 
and wished to go on with his digging. 

"I suppose," he said, "you are still writ- 
ing?" 

"A little," I replied, trying not to speak 
sarcastically. My output had rivaled that of 
" The Duchess " — ^in quantity, I mean. 

"I seldom read — ^fiction," he said, looking 
restlessly at the hole in the ground. 

Miss Holroyd came to my rescue. 



A MATTEB OP INTEREST. 227 

*^That was a charming story you wrote 
last/* she said. "Papa should read it — ^you 
should, papa; it's all about a fossil/' 

We both looked narrowly at Miss Holroyd. 
Her smile was guileless. 

"Fossils!'* repeated the professor. "Do 
you care for fossils? " 

" Very much/' said I. 

Now I am not perfectly sure what my object 
was in lying. I looked at Daisy Holroyd's 
dark-fringed eyes. They were very grave. 

" Fossils/' said I, " are my hobby." 

I think Miss Holroyd winced a little at this. 
I did not care. I went on: 

"I have seldom had the opportunity to 
study the subject, but, as a boy, I collected 
flint arrow-heads— — ^" 

"Flint arrow-headsl " said the professor 
coldly. . 

" Yes; they were the nearest things to fos- 
sils obtainable," I replied, marvelling at my own 
mendacity. 

The professor looked into the hole. I also 
looked. I could see nothing in it. " He's dig- 
ging for fossils," thought I to myself. 

"Perhaps," said the professor cautiously, 
" you might wish to aid me in a little research — 
that is to say, if you have an inclination for 
fossils." The double-entendre was not lost upon 
me. 

"I have read all your books so eagerly," 



228 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

said I, "that to join you, to be of service to 
you in any research, however difficult and try- 
ing, would be an honour and a privilege that I 
never dared to hope for/' 

"That,'' thought I to myself, "will do its 
own work." 

But the professor was still suspicious. How 
could he help it, when he remembered Jack's 
escapades, in which my name was always blend- 
ed! Doubtless he was satisfied that my influ- 
ence on Jack was evil. The contrary was the 
case, too. 

"Fossils," he said, worrying the edges of 
the excavation with his spade, " fossils are not 
things to be lightly considered." 
/ " No, indeed! " I protested. 

" Fossils are the most interesting as well as 
puzzling things in the world," said he. 

"They are!" I cried enthusiastically. 

" But I am not looking for fossils," observed 
the professor mildly. 

This was a facer. I looked at Daisy Hol- 
royd. She bit her lip and fixed her eyes on 
the sea. Her eyes were wonderful eyes. 

"Did you think I was digging for fossils 
in a salt meadow?" queried the professor. 
" You can have read very little about the sub- 
ject. I am digging for something quite differ- 
ent." 

I was silent. I knew that my face was a 
trifle flushed. I longed to say, "Well, what 



A MATTER OF INTEREST. 229 

the devil are you digging for?'* but I only 
stared into the hole as though hypnotized. 

"Captain McPeek and Frisby ought to be 
here/' he said, looking first at Daisy and then 
across the meadows. 

I ached to ask him why he had subpoenaed 
Captain McPeek and Prisby. 

" They are coming/' said Daisy, shading 
her eyes. " Do you see the speck on the 
meadows?'' 

"It may be a mud hen/' said the pro- 
fessor. 

"Miss Holroyd is right," I said. "A 
wagon and team and two men are coming from 
the north. There is a dog beside the wagon — ' 
it's that miserable yellow dog of Frisby's." ^ 

" Good gracious! " cried the professor, " you 
don't mean to tell me that you see all that at 
such a distance?" 

"Why not? "I said. 

"I see nothing," he insisted. 

" You will see that I'm right, presently," I 
laughed. 

The professor removed his blue goggles and 
rubbed them, glancing obliquely at me. 

"Haven't you heard what extraordinary 
eyesight duck shooters have?" said his daugh- 
ter, looking back at her father. "Jack says 
that they can tell exactly what kind of a duck 
is flying before most people could see anything 
at all in the sky." 



230 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

'^ If s true/' I said; ** it comes to anybody, 
I fancy, who has had practice/' 

The professor regarded me with a new in- 
terest. There was inspiration in his eyes. He 
turned toward the ocean. For a long time he 
stared at the tossing waves on the beach, then 
he looked far out to where the horizon met 
the sea. 

" Are there any ducks out there? '' he asked 
at last. 

"Yes,'' said I, scanning the sea, ** there 
are." 

He produced a pair of binoculars from his 
coat-tail pocket, adjusted them, and raised them 
to his eyes. 

«H'm! What sort of ducks?" 

I looked more carefully, holding both hands 
over my forehead. 

" Surf ducks — scoters and widgeon. There 
is one bufflehead among them — ^no, two; the 
rest are coots," I replied. 

"This," cried the professor, "is most as- 
tonishing. I have good eyes, but I can't see 
a blessed thing without these binoculars! " 

" It's not extraordinary," said I; " the surf 
ducks and coots any novice might recognise; 
the widgeon and buffleheads I should not have 
been able to name unless they had risen from 
the water. It is easy to tell any duck when it is 
flying, even though it looks no bigger than a 
black pin-point." 



A MATTER OF INTEREST. 231 

But the professor insisted that it was 
marvellous^ and he said that I might ren- 
der him invaluable service if I would consent 
to come and camp at Fine Inlet for a few 
weeks. 

I looked at his daughter, but she turned 
her back — ^not exactly in disdain either. Her 
back was beautifully moulded. Her gown jStted 
also. 

Camp out here?*' I repeated, pretending 
to be unpleasantly surprised. 

'*I do not think he would care to,*' said 
Miss Holroyd without turning. 

I had not expected that. 

" Above all things,^' said I, in a clear, pleas- 
ant voice, *^ I like to camp out.'^ 

She said nothing. 

** It is not exactly camping,'^ said the pro- 
fessor. " Come, you shall see our conservatory. 
Daisy, come, dearl you must put on a heavier 
frock; it is getting toward sundown.'* 

At that moment, over a ne^ dune, two 
horses' heads appeared, followed by two human 
heads, then a wagon, then a yellow dog. 

I turned triumphantly to the professor. 

'^You are the very man I want," he mut- 
tered; ** the very man — ^the very man." 

I looked at Daisy Holroyd. She returned 
my glance with a defiant little smile. 

**Waal," said Captain McPeek, driving up, 
" here we be! Git out, Prisby." 
16 



232 THE MYSTEEY OP CHOICE. 

Prisby, fat, nervous, and sentimental, 
hopped out of the cart. 

" Cornel'* said the professor, impatiently 
moving across the dunes. I walked with Daisy 
Holroyd. McPeek and Frisby followed. The 
yellow dog walked by himself. 



II. 

The sun was dipping into the sea as we 
trudged across the meadows toward a high 
dome-shaped dune covered with cedars and 
thickets of sweet bay. I saw no sign of habita- 
tion among the sand hills. Far as the eye 
could reach, nothing broke the gray line of sea 
and sky save the squat dunes crowned with 
stunted cedars. 

Then, as we rounded the base of the dune, 
we almost walked into the door of a house. 
My amazement amused Miss Holroyd, and I 
noticed also a touch of malice in her pretty 
eyes. But she said nothing, following her 
father into the house, with the slightest possi- 
ble gesture to me. Was it invitation, or was it 
menace? 

The house was merely a light wooden frame, 
covered with some waterproof stuflE that looked 
like a mixture of rubber and tar. Over this — 
in fact, over the whole roof — ^was pitched an 
awning of heavy sail-cloth. I noticed that the 
house was anchored to the sand by chains, al- 



A MATTER OP INTEREST. 233 

ready rusted red. But this one-storied house 
was not the only building nestling in the south 
shelter of the big dune. A hundred feet away 
stood another structure — ^long, low, also built of 
wood. It had rows on rows of round port- 
holes on every side. The ports were fitted with 
heavy glass, hinged to swing open if neces- 
sary. A single big double door occupied the 
front. 

Behind this long, low building was still 
another, a mere shed. Smoke rose from the 
sheet-iron chinmey. There was somebody mov- 
ing about inside the open door. 

As I stood gaping at this mushroom hamlet 
the professor appeared at the door and asked 
me to enter. I stepped in at once. 

The house was much larger than I had im- 
agined. A straight hallway ran through the 
centre from east to west. On either side of 
this hallway were rooms, the doors swinging 
wide open. I counted three doors on each 
side; the three on the south appeared to be 
bedrooms. 

The professor ushered me into a room on 
the north side, where I found Captain McPeek 
and Prisby sitting at a table, upon which were 
drawings and sketches of articxdated animals 
and fishes. 

" You see, McPeek,^' said the professor, " we 
only wanted one more man, and I think Pve 
got him. — ^Haven^t I? '* turning eagerly to me. 



234 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

" Why, yes/^ I said, laughing; " this is de- 
lightful. Am I invited to stay here? " 

" Your bedroom is the third on the south 
side; everything is ready. McPeek, you can 
bring his trunk to-morrow, can't you?'* de- 
manded the professor. 

The red-faced captain nodded, and shifted 
a quid. 

"Then it's all settled,'^ said the professor, 
and he drew a sigh of satisfaction. "You 
see,'* he said, turning to me, " I was at my wif g 
end to know whom to trust. I never thought 
of you. Jack's out in China, and I didn't dare 
trust anybody in my own profession. All you 
care about is writing verses and stories, isn't 
it?" 

" I like to shoot," I replied mildly. 

" Just the thing! " he cried, beaming at us 
all in turn. "Now I can see no reason why 
we should not progress rapidly. McPeek, you 
and Frisby must get those boxes up here before 
dark. Dinner will be ready before you have 
finished unloading. Dick, you will wish to go 
to your room first." 

My name isn't Dick, but he spoke so kindly, 
and beamed upon me in such a fatherly manner, 
that I let it go. I had occasion to correct him 
afterward, several times, but he always forgot 
the next minute. He calls me Dick to this 
day. 

It was dark when Professor Holroyd, his 



A MATTEK OP INTEREST. 236 

daughter, and I sat down to dinner. The room 
was the same in which I had noticed the draw- 
ings of beast and bird, but the round table had 
been extended into an oval, and neatly spread 
with dainty linen and silver. 

A fresh-cheeked Swedish girl appeared from 
a further room, bearing the soup. The professor 
ladled it out, still beaming. 

"Now, this is very delightful! — ^isn^t it, 
Daisy? ^^ he said. 

" Very,^^ said Miss Holroyd, with the faint- 
est tinge of irony. 

*^ Yery/^ I repeated heartily; but I looked 
at my soup when I said it. 

"I suppose,^^ said the professor, nodding 
mysteriously at his daughter, " that Dick knows 
nothing of what we^re about down here?^' 

*^I suppose,^' said Miss Holroyd, "that he 
thinks we are digging for fossils.'" 

I looked at my plate. She might have 
spared me that. 

"Well, well,'* said her father, smiling to 
himself, "he shall know everything by morn- 
ing. You^l be astonished, Dick, my boy.'* 

" His name isn't Dick," corrected Daisy. 

The professor said, " Isn't it? " in an absent- 
minded way, and relapsed into contemplation of 
my necktie. 

I asked Miss Holroyd a few questions about 
Jack, and was informed that he had given up 
law and entered the diplomatic service — ^as 



THS MYSTERY OF CHOICB. 

what, I did not dare ask, for I know what our 
diplomatic service is. 

" In China,^' said Daisy. 

" Choo Choo is the name of the city,** added 
her father proudly; " if s the terminus of the 
new trans-Siberian railway/^ 

" If s on the Yellow Eiver,*' said Daisy. 

** He^s vice-consul,^* added the professor tri- 
umphantly. 

"He*ll make a good one,** I observed. I 
knew Jack. I pitied his consul. 

So we chatted on about my old playmate, 
until Freda, the red-cheeked maid, brought cof- 
fee, and the professor lighted a cigar, with a 
little bow to his daughter. 

" Of course, you don*t smoke,** she said to 
me, with a glimmer of malice in her eyes. 

^*He mustn*t,** interposed the professor 
hastily; ** it will make his hand tremble.** 

"No, it doesn*t,** said I, laughing; "but 
my hand will shake if I don*t smoke. Are 
you going to employ me as a draughtsman? ** 

"You*ll know to-morrow,** he chuckled, 
with a mysterious sildle at his daughter. — 
" Daisy, give him my best cigars; put the box 
here on the table. We can*t afford to have his 
hand tremble.** 

Miss Holroyd rose, and crossed the hallway 
to her f ather*s room, returning presently with 
a box of promising-looking cigars. 

"I don*t think he knows what is good for 



A MATTEK OF INTEEEST. 337 

him/' she said. "He should smoke only one 
every day/^ 

It was hard to bear. I am not vindictive, 
but I decided to treasure up a few of Miss Hol- 
royd^s gentle taunts. My intimacy with her 
brother was certainly a disadvantage to me now. 
Jack had apparently been talking too much, 
and his sister appeared to be thoroughly ac- 
quainted with my past. It was a disadvantage. 
I remembered her vaguely as a girl with long 
braids, who used to come on Sundays with her 
father and take tea with us in our rooms. Then 
she went to Germany to school, and Jack and 
I employed our Sunday evenings otherwise. It 
is true that I regarded her weekly visits as a 
species of infliction, but I did not think I ever 
showed it. 

" It is strange,'^ said I, " that you did not 
recognise me at once. Miss Holroyd. Have I 
changed so greatly in five years? *' 

"You wore a pointed French beard in 
Paris,'* she said — "a very downy one. And 
you never stayed to tea but twice, and then 
you only spoke once.'' 

" OhI " said I blankly. " What did I say? " 

"You asked me if I liked plums," said 
Daisy, bursting into an irresistible ripple of 
laughter. 

I saw that I must have made the same sort 
of an ass of myself that most boys of eighteen 
do. 



238 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

It was too bad. I never thought about the 
future in those days. Who could have imag- 
ined that little Daisy Holroy^ would have grown 
up into this bewildering young lady? It was 
really too bad. Presently the professor retired 
to his room, carrying with him an armful of 
drawings, and bidding us not to sit up late. 
When he closed his door Miss Holroyd turned 
to me. 

" Papa will work over those drawings until 
midnight,^' she said, with a despairing smile. 

"It isn't good for him,*' I said. "What 
are the drawings? '^ 

" You may know to-morrow,*' she answered, 
leaning forward on the table and shading her 
face with one hand. ^* Tell me about yourself 
and Jack in Paris.** 

I looked at her suspiciously. 

"What I- There isn*t much to tell. We 
studied. Jack went to the law school, and I 
attended— er— oh, all sorts of schools.** 

"Did you? Surely you gave yourself a 
little recreation occasionally?** 

" Occasionally,** I nodded. 

"I am afraid you and Jack studied too 
hard.** 

"That may be,** said I, looking meek. 

" Especially about fossils.** 

I couldn*t stand that. 

"Miss Holroyd,** I said, "I do care for 
fossils. You may think that I am a hum- 



A MATTEE OF INTEBEST. 

"bug, but I have a perfect mania for fossils — 
now/' 

"Since when? *' 

" About an hour ago/' I said airily. Out of 
the comer of my eye I saw that she had flushed 
up. It pleased me. 

" You will soon tire of the experiment/' she 
said with a dangerous smile. 

" Oh, I may/' I replied indiflferently. 

She drew back. The movement was scarce- 
ly perceptible, but I noticed it, and she knew 
I did. 

The atmosphere was vaguely hostile. One 
feels such mental conditions and changes in- 
stantly. I picked up a chessboard, opened it, 
set up the pieces with elaborate care, and began 
to move, first the white, then the black. Miss 
Holroyd watched me coldly at first, but after 
a dozen moves she became interested and leaned 
a shade nearer. I moved a black pawn for- 
ward. 

" Why do you do that? " said Daisy. 

" Because," said I, " the white queen threat- 
ens the pawn." 

" It was an aggressive move," she insisted. 

" Purely defensive/' I said. " If her white 
highness will let the pawn alone, the pawn will 
let the queen alone." 

Miss Holroyd rested her chin on her wrist 
and gazed steadily at the board. She was flush- 
ing furiously, but she held her ground. 



240 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

**If the white queen doesn't block that 
pawn^ the pawn may become dangerous/* she 
said coldly. 

I laughed^ and closed up the board with a 
snap. 

" True/* I said, " it. might even take the 
queen.** After a moment*8 silence I asked, 
" What would you do in that case. Miss Hol- 
royd?** 

"I should resign,** she said serenely; then 
realizing what i^e had said, she lost her self- 
possession for a second, and cried: "No, in- 
deed! I should fight to the bitter end! I 
mean ^** 

*^What?** I asked, lingering over my re- 
venge. 

" I mean/* she said slowly, *^ that your black 
pawn would never have the chance — ^neverl I 
should take it immediately.** 

" I believe you would,** said I, smiling; " so 
we*ll call the game yours, and — ^the pawn cap- 
tured.** 

"I don*t want it,** she exclaimed. "A 
pawn is worthless.** 

*^ Except when it*s in the king row.** 

*^ Chess is most interesting,** she observed 
sedately. She had completely recovered, her 
self-control. Still I saw that she now had a 
certain respect for my defensive powers. It 
was very soothing to me. 

"You know,** said I gravely, "that I am 



A MATTER OF INTEREST. 241 

fonder of Jack than of anybody. Thaf s the 
reason we never write each other, except to bor- 
row things. I am afraid that when I was a 
young cub in France I was not an attractive 
personality.^* 

" On the contrary/' said Daisy, smiling, " I 
thought you were very big and very perfect. 
I had illusions. I wept often when I went 
home and remembered that you never took the 
trouble to speak to me but once.** 

*^I was a cub,** I said; "not selfish and 
brutal, but I didn*t understand schoolgirls. I 
never had any sisters, and I didn't know what to 
say to very young girls. If I had imagined 
that you felt hurt ^** 

"Oh, I did — ^five years ago. Afterward I 
laughed at the whole thing.** 

"Laughed?** I repeated, vaguely disap- 
pointed. 

*^Why, of course. I was very easily hurt 
when I was a child. I think I have outgrown 
it.** 

The soft curve of her sensitive mouth con- 
tradicted her. 

"Will you forgive me now?** I asked. 

"Yes. I had forgotten the whole thing 
imtil I met you an hour or so ago.** 

There was something that had a ring not 
entirely genuine in this speech. I noticed it, 
but forgot it the next moment. 

"Tiger cubs have stripes,** said I. "Sel- 



242 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

fishness blossoms in the cradle^ and prophecy is 
not difficult. I hope I am not more selfish 
than my brothers.^' 

" I hope not/* she said, smiling. 

Presently she rose, touched her hair with 
the tip of one finger, and walked to the door. 

"Good-night,*' she said, courtesying very 
low. 

" Good-night,*' said I, opening the door for 
her to pass. 

ni. 

The sea was a sheet of silver, tinged with 
pink. The tremendous arch of the sky was 
all shimmering and glimmering with the prom- 
ise of the sun. Already the mist above, flecked 
with clustered clouds, flushed with rose colour 
and dull gold. I heard the low splash of the 
waves breaking and curling across the beach. 
A wandering breeze, fresh and fragrant, blew 
the curtains of my window. There was the 
scent of sweet bay in the room, and every- 
where the subtile, nameless perfume of the sea. 

When at last I stood upon the shore, the 
air and sea were all aglimmer in a rosy light, 
deepening to crimson in the zenith. Along 
the beach I saw a little cove, shelving and all 
ashine, where shallow waves washed with a mel^ 
low sound. Fine as dusted gold the shingle 
glowed, and the thin film of water rose, receded, 
crept up again a little higher, and again flowed 



A MATTEB OP INTEBEST. 243 

back^ with the low hiss of snowy foam and 
gilded bubbles breaking. 

I stood a little while quiet, my eyes upon 
the water, the invitation of the ocean in my 
ears, vague and sweet as the murmur of a shell. 
Then I looked at my bathing suit and towels. 

" In we go! '* said I aloud. A second later 
the prophecy was fulfilled. 

I swam far out to sea, and as I swam the 
waters all around me turned to gold. The sun 
had risen. 

There is a fragrance in the sea at dawn that 
none can name. Whitethorn abloom in May, 
sedges asway, and scented rushes rustling in 
an inland wind recall the sea to me — ^I can't say 
why. 

Far out at sea I raised myself, swung 
around, dived, and set out again for shore, strik- 
ing strong strokes until the flecked foam flew. 
And when at last I shot through the breakers, 
I laughed aloud and sprang upon the beach, 
breathless and happy. Then from the ocean 
came another cry, clear, joyous, and a white 
arm rose in the air. 

She came drifting in with the waves like 
a white sea-sprite, laughing at me from her 
tangled hair, and I plunged into the breakers 
again to join her. 

Side by side we swam along the coast, just 
outside the breakers, until in the next cove we 
saw the flutter of her maid's cap strings. 



244 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

*^ I will beat you to breaMastl '' she cried, as 
I rested, watching her glide up along the beachi. 

'' Done! '' said I—" for a sea-shelll '' 

*^ Done! '* she cfdled across the water. 

I made good speed along the shore, and I 
was not long in dressing, but when I entered 
the dining-room she was there, demure, smil- 
ing, exquisite in her cool, white frock. 

*^ The sea-shell is yours,^* said I. "I hope 
I can find one with a pearl in it.^^ 

The professor hurried in before she could 
reply. He greeted me very cordially, but there 
was an abstracted air about him, and he called 
me Dick until I recognised that remonstrance 
was useless. He was not long over his coffee 
and rolls. 

^^McPeek and Prisby will return with the 
last load, including your trunk, by early after- 
noon,'^ he said, rising and picking up his bundle 
of drawings. *^I haven't time to explain to 
you what we are doing, Dick, but Daisy will 
take you about and instruct you. She will give 
you the rifle standing in my room — ^it's a good 
Winchester. I have sent for an ^ Express ' for 
you, big enough to knock over any elephant 
in India. — ^Daisy, take him through the sheds 
and tell him everything. Luncheon is at noon. 
— ^Do you usually take luncheon, Dick? '' 

** When I am permitted,'* I smiled. 

" Well," said the professor doubtfully, " you 
mustn't come back here for it. Freda can take 



A MATTER OF INTEREST. 245 

you what you want. Is your hand unsteady 
after eating?^' 

^'Why, papa!*' said Daisy. "Do you in- 
tend to starve him? '* 

We all laughed. 

The professor tucked his drawings into a 
capacious pockety pulled his sea boots up to his 
hips^ seized a spade^ and left^ nodding to us 
as though he were thinking of something else. 

We went to the door and watched him across 
the salt meadows until a distant sand dune hid 
him. 

" Come/' said Daisy Holroyd, " I am going 
to take you to the shop.'* 

She put on a broad-brimmed straw hat^ a 
distractingly pretty combination of filmy cool 
stuffs^ and led the way to the long low struc- 
ture that I had noticed the evening before. 

The interior was lighted by the numberless 
little portholes, and I could see everything 
plainly. I acknowledge I was nonplussed by 
what I did see. 

In the centre of the shed, which must have 
been at least a hundred feet long, stood what 
I thought at first was the skeleton of an enor- 
mous whale. After a moment's silent contem- 
jdation of the thing I saw that it could not be 
a whale, for the frames of two gigantic bat-like 
wings rose from each shoulder. Also I noticed 
that the animal possessed legs — ^four of them — 
with most unpleasant-looUng webbed daws 



246 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

fully eight feet long. The bony framework of 
the head, too, resembled something between a 
crocodile and a monstrous snapping turtle. The 
walls of the shanty were hung with drawings 
and blue prints. A man dressed in white linen 
was tinkering with the vertebrae of the lizard- 
like tail. 

"Where on earth did such a reptile come 
from? ** I asked at length. 

" Oh, if s not reall ^^ said Daisy scornfully; 
" it*s papier-mach6.^^ 

*^ I see,^^ said I — ^* a stage prop.*' 

" A what? '* asked Daisy, in hurt astonish- 
ment. 

"Why, a — a sort of Siegfried dragon — 
a what's-his-name — er, Pfafner, or Peflfer, 
or '' 

"If my father heard you say such things 
he would dislike you,** said Daisy. She looked 
grieved, and moved toward the door. I apolo- 
gized — ^for what, I knew not— and we became 
reconciled. She ran into her father's room and 
brought me the rifle, a very good Winches- 
ter. She also gave me a c^u'tridge belt, full. 

"Now,** she smiled, "I shall take you to 
your observatory, and when we arrive you are 
to begin your duty at once.** 

" And that duty? ** I ventured, shouldering 
the rifle. 

" That duty is, to watch the ocean. I shall 
then explain the whole afEair-^but you mustn*t 



A MATTER OP INTEREST. 247 

look at me while I speak; you must watch the 



" This/* said I, " is hardship. I had rather 
go without the luncheon.*' 

I do not think she was oflEended at my 
speech; still she frowned for almost three sec- 
onds. 

We passed through acres of sweet bay and 
spear grass, sometimes skirting thickets of 
twisted cedars, sometimes walking in the full 
glare of the morning sun, sinking into shifting 
sand where sun-scorched shells crackled under 
our feet, and sun-browned seaweed glistened, 
bronzed and iridescent. Then, as we climbed 
a little hill, the sea wind freshened in our faces, 
and lol the ocean lay below us, far-stretching 
as the eye could reach, glittering, magnificent. 

Daisy sat down flat on the sand. It takes 
a clever girl to do that and retain the respectful 
deference due her from men. It takes a grace- 
ful girl to accomplish it triumphantly when a 
man is looking. 

''You must sit beside me,** she said — ^as 
though it would prove irksome to me. 

"Now,** she continued, "you must watch 
the water while I am talking.** 

I nodded. 

" Why don't you do it, then? ** she asked. 

I succeeded in wrenching my head toward 
the ocean, although I felt sure it would swing 
gradually round again in spite of me. 
17 



248 THE MYSTEBY OP GHOICB. 

*^To begin with/* said Daisy Holroyd, 
"there^s a thing in that ocean that would as- 
tonish you if you saw it. Turn your headi *' 

" I am/* I said meekly. 

" Did you hear what I said? *' 

*^ Yes — er — ^a thing in the ocean that's go- 
ing to astonish me.*' Visions of mermaids rose 
before me. 

^^ The thing/* said Daisy, " is a Thermosau- 
rusl** 

I nodded vaguely, as though anticipating 
a delightful introduction to a nautical friend. 

*^ You don*t seem astonished/* she said re- 
proachfully. 

" Why should I be? ** I asked. 

*^ Please turn your eyes toward the water. 
Suppose a Thermosaurus should look out of the 
waves! ** 

" Well/* said I, " in that case the pleasure 
would be mutWl.** 

She frowned, and bit her upper lip. 

" Do you know what a Thermosaurus is? ** 
she asked. 

" If I am to guess/* said I, " I guess it*s a 
jellyfish.** 

*^ It*s that big, ugly, horrible creature that 
I showed you in the shed! ** cried Daisy impa- 
tiently. 

''Eh!** I stammered. 

"Not papier-mach6 either,** she continued 
excitedly; "it*s a real one.** 



A MATTES OF INTEREST. 249 

This was pleasant news. I glanced in- 
stinctively at my rifle and then at the ocean. 

''Well/' said I at last, ''it strikes me that 
you and I resemble a pair of Andromedas wait- 
ing to be swallowed. This rifle won't stop a 
beast, a live beast, like that Nibelungen dragon 
of yours.'' 

"Yes, it will," she said; '4t's not an or- 
dinary rifle." 

Then, for the flrst time, I noticed, just be- 
low the magazine, a cylindrical attachment that 
was strange to me. 

" Now, if you will watch the sea very care- 
fully, and will promise not to look at me," said 
Daisy, " I will try to explain." 

She did not wait for me to promise, but 
went on eagerly, a sparkle of excitement in her 
blue eyes: 

" You know, of all the fossil remains of the 
great bat-like and lizard-like creatures that in- 
habited the earth ages and ages ago, the bones 
of the gigantic saurians are the most interest- 
ing. I think they used to splash about the 
water and fly over the land during the Car- 
boniferous period; anyway, it doesn't matter. 
Of course, you have seen pictures of recon- 
structed creatures such as the Ichthyosaurus, 
the Flesiosaurus, the Anthracosaurus, and the 
Thermosaurus? " 

I nodded, trying to keep my eyes from 
hers. 



250 THE MYSTEEY OP CHOICE. 

''And you know that the remains of the 
Thermoeaurus were first discovered and recon- 
structed by papa?^* 

" Yes/' said I. There was no use in saying 
no. 

" I am glad you do. Now, papa has proved 
that this creature lived entirely in the Gulf 
Stream, emerging for occasional flights across 
an ocean or two. Can you imagine how he 
proved it?'' 

"No," said I, resolutely pointing my nose 
at the ocean. 

"He proved it by a minute examination 
of the microscopical shells found among the 
ribs of the Thermosaurus. These shells con- 
tained little creatures that live only in the 
warm waters of the Gulf Stream. They were 
the food of the Thermosaurus." 

" It was rather slender rations for a thing 
like that, wasn't it? Did he ever swallow big- 
ger food — er — men? " 

" Oh, yes. Tons of fossil bones from pre- 
historic men are also found in the interior of 
the Thermosaurus." 

" Then," said I, " you, at least, had better 
go back to Captain McPeek's ^" 

"Please turn around; don't be so foolish. 
I didn't say there was a live Thermosaurus in 
the water, did I?" 

"Isn't there?" 

"Why, no!" 



A MATTEB OF INTEBEST. 261 

My relief was genuine^ but I thought of the 
rifle and looked suspiciously out to sea. 

" Whafs the Winchester for?'' I asked. 

" Listen, and I will explain. Papa has found 
out — ^how, I do not exactly understand — ^that 
there is in the waters of the Oulf Stream the 
body of a Thermosaurus. The creature must 
have been alive within a year or so. The im- 
penetrable scale armour that covers its body has, 
as far as papa knows, prevented its disintegra- 
tion. We know that it is there still, or was 
there within a few months. Papa has reports 
and sworn depositions from steamer captains 
and seamen from a dozen different vessels, all 
corroborating each other in essential details. 
These stories, of course, get into the newspapers 
— sea-serpent stories — ^but papa knows that they 
confirm his theory that the huge body of this 
reptile is swinging along somewhere ou the Oulf 
Stream.'' 

She opened her sunshade and held it over 
her. I noticed that she deigned to give me 
the benefit of about one eighth of it. 

"Your duty with that rifle is this: K we 
are fortunate enough to see the body of the 
Thermosaurus come floating by, you are to take 
good aim and fire — ^fire rapidly every bullet in 
the magazine; then reload and fire again, and 
reload and fire as long as you have any car- 
tridges left." 

"A self -feeding Maxim is what I should 



253 THE MYSTEBY OP CHOICE. 

have/' I said with gentie sarcasm. "Well, 
and suppose I make a sieve of this big lizard? '* 

" Do you see these rings in the sand? '* she 
asked. 

Sure enough, somebody had driven heavy 
piles deep into the sand all around us, and to 
the tops of these piles were attached steel rings, 
half buried under the spear grass. We sat al- 
most exactly in the centre of a circle of these 
rings. 

"The reason is this,'* said Daisy: "every 
bullet in your cartridges is steel-tipped and 
WTOOur-piercing. To the base of each bullet 
is attached a thin wire of pallium. Pallium 
is that new metal, a thread of which, drawn 
out into finest wire, will hold a ton of iron 
suspended. Every bullet is fitted with minute 
coils of miles of this wire. When the bullet 
leaves the rifle it spins out this wire as a shot 
from a life-saver^s mortar spins out and carries 
the life line to a wrecked ship. The end of 
each coil of wire is attached to that cylinder 
under the magazine of your rifle. As soon as 
the shell is automatically ejected this wire flies 
out also. A bit of scarlet tape is fixed to the 
end, so that it will be easy to pick up. There 
is also a snap clasp on the end, aiid this clasp 
fits those rings that you see in the sand. Now, 
when you begin firing, it is my duty to run 
and pick up the wire ends and attach them to 
the rings. Then, you see, we have the body 



A MATTEK OF INTEBEST. 253 

of the Thermosaums full of bullets, every bullet 
anchored to the shore by tiny wires, each of 
which could easily hold a ton's strain/' 

I looked at her in amazement. 

" Then/' she added calmly, ^^ we have cap- 
tured the Thermosaurus/' 

"Your father,'' said I at length, "must 
have spent years of labour over this prepara- 
tion/' 

"It is the work of a lifetime," she said 
simply. 

My face, I suppose, showed my misgiv- 
ings. 

" It must not fail," she added. 

" But — ^but we are nowhere near the Gulf 
Stream," I ventured. 

Her face brightened, and she frankly held 
the sunshade over us both. 

"Ah, you don't know," she said, "what 
else papa has discovered. Would you believe 
that he has found a loop in the Gulf Stream — 
a genuine loop — ^that swings in here just outside 
of the breakers below? It is truel Every- 
body on Long Island knows that there is a 
warm current off the coast, but nobody imag- 
ined it was merely a sort of backwater from the 
Gulf Stream that formed a great circular mill- 
race around the cone of a subterranean volcano, 
and rejoined the Gulf Stream off Cape Alba- 
tross. But it is I That is why papa bought a 
yacht three years ago and sailed about for two 



254 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

years so mysteriously. Oh^ I did want to go 
with him so much! ^' 

*^ This/^ said I, " is most astonishing." 

She leaned enthusiastically toward me, her 
lovely face aglow. 

"IsnH it?" she said; "and to think that 
you and papa and I are the only people in the 
whole world who know thisl " 

To be included in such a triology was very 
delightful. 

" Papa is writing the whole thing — ^I mean 
about the currents. He also has in preparation 
sixteen volumes on the Thermosaurus. He said 
this morning that he was going to ask you to 
write the story first for some scientific maga- 
zine. He is certain that Professor Bruce Stod- 
dard, of Columbia, will write the pamphlets 
necessary. This will give papa time to attend 
to the siiteen-volume work, which he expects to 
finish in three years." 

*^ Let us first," said I, laughing, '* catch our 
Thermosaurus." 

"We must not fail," she said wistfully. 

" We shall not fail," I said, " for I promise 
to sit on this sand hill as long as I live — ^until 
a Thermosaurus appears — ^if that is your wish. 
Miss Holroyd." 

Our eyes met for an instant. She did not 
chide me, either, for not looking at the ocean. 
Her eyes were bluer, anyway. 

"I suppose," she said, bending her hea4 



A MATTEB OF INTEBEST. 256 

and absently pouring sand between her fingers 
— " I suppose you think me a blue-stocking, or 
something odious?'* 

**N"ot exactly/' I said. There was an em- 
phasis in my voice that made her colour. After 
a moment she laid the sunshade down, still 
open. 

^^May I hold it?'' I asked. 

She nodded almost imperceptibly. 

The ocean had turned a deep marine blue, 
verging on purple, that heralded a scorching 
afternoon. The wind died away; the odour of 
cedar and sweet bay hung heavy in the air. 

In the sand at our feet an iridescent flower 
beetle crawled, its metallic green and blue wings 
burning like a spark. Great gnats, with filmy, 
glittering wings, danced aimlessly above the 
young golden-rod; burnished crickets, inquisi- 
tive, timid, ran from under chips of driftwood, 
waved their antennae at us, and ran back again. 
One by one the marbled tiger beetles tumbled 
at our feet, dazed from the exertion of an aerial 
flight, then scrambled and ran a little way, or 
darted into the wire grass, where great brilliant 
spiders eyed them askance from their gossamer 
hammocks. 

Far out at sea the white gulls floated and 
drifted on the water, or sailed up into the air 
to flap lazily for a moment and settle back 
among the waves. Strings of black surf ducks 
passed, their strong wings tipping the surface 



266 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

of the water; single wandering coots whirled 
from the breakers into lonely flight toward 
the horizon. 

We lay and watched the little ring-necks 
running along the water's edge, now backing 
away from the incoming tide, now boldly wad- 
ing after the undertow. The harmony of si- 
lence, the deep perfume, the mystery of wait- 
ing for that something that all await — ^what 
is it? love? death? or only the miracle of 
another morrow? — ^troubled me with vague 
restfulness. As sunlight casts shadows, happi- 
ness, too, throws a shadow, and the shadow is 



And so the morning wore away until Freda 
came with a cool-looking hamper. Then de- 
licious cold fowl and lettuce sandwiches and 
champagne cup Set our tongues wagging as only 
very young tongues can wag. Daisy went back 
with Freda after luncheon, leaving me a case 
of cigars, with a bantering smile. I dozed, half 
awake, keeping a partly closed eye on the ocean, 
where a faint gray streak showed plainly amid 
the azure water -all around. That was the Gulf 
Stream loop. 

About four o'clock Frisby appeared with a 
bamboo shelter tent, for which I was unaffect- 
edly grateful. 

After he had erected it ov^^tne he stopped 
to chat a bit, but the conversation bored me, for 
he could talk of nothing but bill-posting. 



A MATTEB OF INTEKEST. 257 

''You wouldnH ruin the landscape here, 
would you? ^* I asked. 

*'Euin it!*' repeated Frisby nervously. 
''It's ruined now; there ain't a place to stick 
a bill.'' 

" The snipe stick bills — ^in the sand," I said 
flippantly. 

There was no humour about Frisby. " Do 
they? " he asked. 

I moved with a certain impatience. 

"Bills," said Frisby, '^give spice an' va- 
riety to Nature. They break the monotony 
of the everlastin' green and what-you-may- 
eaU-its." 

I glared at him. 

"Bills," he continued, "are not easy to 
stick, lemme tell you, sir. Sign paintin's a 
soft snap when it comes to bill-stickin'. Now, I 
guess I've stuck more bills in New York State 
than ennybody." 

"Have you?" I said angrily. 

" Yes, siree! I always pick out the purtiest 
spots — ^kinder filled chuck full of woods and 
brooks and things; then I h'ist my paste-pot 
onto a rock, and I slather that rock with gum, 
and whoop she goes! " 

"Whoop what goes?" 

" The bill. I paste her onto the rock, with 
one swipe of the brush for the edges and a 
back-handed swipe for the finish— except when 
a bill is folded in two halves." 



258 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

'^ And what do you do then? ^' I asked, dis- 
gusted. 

** Swipe twice/' said Frisby with enthu- 
siasm. 

" And you don't think it injures the land- 
scape?'' 

" Injures itl " he exclaimed, convinced that 
I was attempting to joke. 

I looked wearily out to sea. He also looked 
at the water and sighed sentimentally. 

^^Ploatin' buoys with bills onto 'em is a 
idea of mine," he observed. *^ That danm ocean 
is monotonous, ain't it? " 

I don't know what I might have done to 
Frisby — ^the rifle was so convenient — ^if his mean 
yellow dog had not waddled up at this junc- 
ture. 

'^Hi, Davy, sic 'em!" said Frisby, expec- 
torating upon a clamshell and hurling it seaward. 
The cur watched the flight of the shell apa- 
thetically, then squatted in the sand and looked 
at his master. 

" Kinder lost his spirit," said Frisby, " ain't 
he? I once stuck a bill onto Davy, an' it come 
oflf, an' the paste sorter sickened him. He was 
hell on rats — once! " 

After a moment or two Frisby took him- 
self oflf, whistling cheerfully to Davy, who fol- 
lowed him when he was ready. The rifle burned 
in my fingers. 

It was nearly six o'clock when the professor 



A MATTEB OF INTEEEST. 259 

appeared, spade on shoulder, boots smeared with 
mud. 

" Well/* he said, " nothing to report, Dick, 
my boy?*' 

" Nothing, professor.'* 

He wiped his shining face with his handker- 
chief and stared at the water. 

"My calculations lead me to believe,** he 
said, " that our prize may be due any day now. 
This theory I base upon the result of the report 
from the last sea captain I saw. X can not 
imderstand why some of these captains did not 
take the carcass in tow. They all say that they 
tried, but that the body sank before they could 
come within half a mile. The truth is, proba- 
bly, that they did not stir a foot from their 
course to examine the thing.** 

"Have you ever cruised about for it?** I 
ventured. 

" For two years,** he said grimly. " It*s no 
use; it*s accident when a ship falls in with it. 
One captain reports it a thousand miles from 
where the last skipper spoke it, and always in 
the Gulf Stream. They think it is a diflEerent 
specimen every time, and the papers are teem- 
ing with sea-serpent fol-de-rol.** 

"Are you sure,** I asked, "that it will 
swing in to the coast on this Gulf Stream 
loop?** 

" I think I may say that it is certain to do so. 
I experimented with a dead right whale. You 



260 THE MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

may have heard of its coming ashore here last 
summer/^ 

" I think I did/^ said I with a faint smile. 
The thing had poisoned the air for miles 
around. 

"But/' I continued, "suppose it comes in 
the night?'' 

He laughed. 

"There I am lucky. Every night this 
month, and every day, too, the current of the 
loop runs inland so far that even a porpoise 
would strand for at least twelve hours. Longer 
than that I have not experimented with, hut 
I know that the shore trend of the loop runs 
across a long spur of the submerged volcanic 
mountain, and that anything heavier than a por- 
poise would scrape the bottom and be carried 
so slowly that at least twelve hours must elapse 
before the carcass could float again into deep 
water. There are chances of its stranding in- 
definitely, too, but I don't care to take those 
chances. That is why I have stationed you 
here, Dick, my boy." 

He glanced again at the water, smiling to 
himself. 

" There is another question I want to ask," 
I said, " if you don't mind." 

" Of course not! " he said warmly. 

" What are you digging for? " 

"Why, simply for exercise. The doctor 
told me I was killing myself with my sedentary 



A MATTEB OF INTEEEST. 261 

habits^ so I decided to dig. I don't know a 
better exercise. Do you? *' 

"I suppose not/' I murmured, rather red 
in the face. I wondered whether he'd men|;ion 



"Did Daisy tell you why we are making 
our papier-mach6 Thermosaurus?" he asked. 

I shook my head. 

"We constructed that from measurements 
I took from the fossil remains of the Thermo- 
saurus in the Metropolitan Museum. Professor 
Bruce Stoddard made the drawings. We set it 
up here, all ready to receive the skin of the 
carcass that I am expecting." 

We had started toward home, walking slowly 
across the darkening dunes, shoulder to shoul- 
der. The sand was deep, and walking was not 
easy. 

" I wish," said I at last, " that I knew why 
Miss Holroyd asked me not to walk on the 
beach. It's much less fatiguing." 

"That," said the professor, "is a matter 
that I intend to discuss with you to-night." He 
spoke gravely, almost sadly. I felt that some- 
thing of unparalleled importance was soon to 
be revealed. So I kept very quiet, watching 
the ocean out of the comers of my eyes. 



262 ^I^HB MYSTEBY OF CHOICE. 

IV. 

Dinner was ended. Daisy Holroyd lighted 
her father's pipe for him, and insisted on my 
smoking as much as I pleased. Then she sat 
down, and folded her hands like a good little 
girl, waiting for her father to make the reve- 
lation which I felt in my bones must be some- 
thing out of the ordinary. 

The professor smoked for a while, gazing 
meditatively at his daughter; then, fixing his 
gray eyes on me, he said: 

" Have you ever heard of the kree — that 
Australian bird, half parrot, half hawk, that 
destroys so many sheep in New South Wales? '* 

I nodded. 

" The kree kills a sheep by alighting on its 
back and tearing away the flesh with its hooked 
beak until a vital part is reached. You know 
that? Well, it has been discovered that the kree 
had prehistoric prototypes. These birds were 
enormous creatures, who preyed upon nftm- 
moths and mastodons, and even upon the great 
saurians. It has been conclusively proved that 
a few saurians have been killed by the ancestors 
of the kree, but the favourite food of these 
birds was undoubtedly the Thermosaurus. It 
is believed that the birds attacked the eyes of 
the Thermosaurus, and when, as was its habit, 
the mammoth creature turned on its back to 
claw them, they fell upon the thinner scales 



A MATTER OF INTEREST. 263 

of its stomach armour and finally killed it. 
This, of course, is a theory, but we have almost 
absolute proofs of its correctness. Now, these 
two birds are known among scientists as the 
ekaf-bird and the ool-yllik. The names are 
Australian, in which coimtry most of their re- 
mains have been unearthed. They lived dur- 
ing the Carboniferous period. Now it is not 
generally known, but the fact is, that in 1801 
Captain Eansom, of the British exploring ves- 
sel Gull, purchased from the natives of Tas- 
mania the skin of an ekaf-bird that could not 
have been killed more than twenty-four hours 
previous to its sale. I saw this skin in the 
British Museum. It was labelled "imknown 
bird, probably extinct.'' It took me exactly 
a week to satisfy myself that it was actually the 
skin of an ekaf-bird. But that is not all, Dick, 
my boy,'' continued the professor excitedly. 
"In 1854, Admiral Stuart, of our own navy, 
saw the carcass of a strange gigantic bird float- 
ing along the southern coast of Australia. 
Sharks were after it, and, before a boat could 
^be lowered, these miserable fish got it. But the 
good old admiral secured a few feathers and sent 
them to the Smithsonian. I saw them. They 
were not even labelled, but I knew that they 
were feathers from the ekaf-bird or its near 
relative, the ool-yllik." 

I had grown so interested that I had leaned 
far across the table. Daisy, too, bent forward. 
18 



264 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

It was only when the professor paused for a 
moment that I noticed how close together our 
heads were — ^Daisy^s and mine. I donH think 
she realized it. She did not move. 

" Now comes the important part of this long 
discourse/^ said the professor, smiling at our 
eagerness. " Ever since the carcass of our dere- 
lict Thermosaurus was first noticed, every cap- 
tain who has seen it has also reported the pres- 
ence of one or more gigantic birds in the neigh- 
bourhood. These birds, at a great distance, 
appeared to be hovering over the carcass, but 
on the approach of a vessel they disappeared. 
Even in midocean they were observed. When 
I heard about it I was puzzled. A month later 
I was satisfied that neither the ekaf-bird nor the 
ool-yllik was extinct. Last Monday I knew that 
I was right. I found forty-eight distinct im- 
pressions of the huge seven-toed claw of the 
ekaf-bird on the beach here at Pine Inlet. You 
may imagine my excitement. I succeeded in 
digging up enough wet sand around one of 
these impressions to preserve its form. I man- 
aged to get it into a soap box, and now it is 
ttere in my shop. The tide rose too rapidly 
for me to save the other footprints.'' 

I shuddered at the possibility of a clumsy 
misstep on my part obliterating the impression 
of an ool-yllik. 

"That is the reason that my daughter 
warned you ofE the beach/' he said mildly. 



A MATTEB OP INTEBEST. 265 

'^ Hanging would have been too good for the 
vandal who destroyed such priceless prizesi '^ I 
cried out in self-reproach. 

Daisy Holroyd turned a flushed face to mine, 
and impulsively laid her hand on my sleeve. 

" How could you know? " she said. 

"It^s all right now/^ said her father, em- 
phasizing each word with a gentle tap of his 
pipe-bowl on the table edge; don't be hard on 
yourself, Dick, my boy. You'll do yeoman's 
service yet." 

It was nearly midnight, and still we chatted 
on about the Thermosaurus, the ekaf-bird, and 
the ool-yllik, eagerly discussing the probabiUty 
of the great reptile's carcass being in the vi- 
cinity. That alone seemed to explain the pres- 
ence of these prehistoric birds at Pine Inlet. 

**Do they ever attack human beings?" I 
asked. 

The professor looked startled. 

"Gracious!" he exclaimed, *^I never 
thought of that. And Daisy running about 
out of doors! Dear me! it takes a scientist to 
be an imnatural parent! " 

His alarm was half real, half assumed; but 
all the same, he glanced gravely at us both> 
shaking his handsome head, absorbed in 
thought. Daisy herself looked a little doubt- 
ful. As for me, my sensations were distinctly 
queer. 

"It is true," said the professor, frowning 



266 THE MYSTEEY OP CHOICE. 

at the wall, ^'that human remains have been 
found associated with the bones of the ekaf- 
bird — ^I don^t know how intimately. It is a 
matter to be taken into most serious considera- 
tion.'* 

" The problem can be solved/* said I, *' in 
several ways. One is, to keep Miss Holroyd in 
the house ^^ 

"I shall not stay in!'* cried Daisy indig- 
nantly. 

We all laughed, and her father assured her 
that she should not be abused. 

" Even if I did stay in,** she said, *^ one of 
these birds might alight on Master Dick.** 

She looked saucily at me as she spoke, but 
turned crimson when her father observed 
quietly, "You don*t seem to think of me, 
Daisy.** 

" Of course I do,** she said, getting up and 
putting both arms around her father*s neck; 
^^ but Dick — ^as — ^as you call him — ^is so helpless 
and timid.*' 

My blissful smile froze on my lips. 

" Timid! ** I repeated. 

She came back to the table, making me a 
mocking reverence. 

*^ Do you think I am to be laughed at with 
impunity? ** she said. 

"What are your other plans, Dick, my 
boy?** asked the professor. — "Daisy, let him 
alone, you little tease! ** 



A MATTER OF INTEREST. 

*'One is, to haul a lot of cast-iron boilers 
along the dunes/' I said. " If these birds come 
when the carcass floats in, and if they seem 
disposed to trouble us, we could crawl into the 
boilers and be safe.'' 

"Why, that is really brilliant!" cried 
Daisy. 

"Be quiet, my child! Dick, the plan is 
sound and sensible and perfectly practical. Mc- 
Peek and Frisby shall go for a dozen loads of 
boilers to-morrow." 

" It will spoil the beauty of the landscape," 
said Daisy, with a taunting nod to me. 

" And Frisby will probably attempt to cover 
them with bill-posters," I added, laughing. 

" That," said Daisy, " I shall prevent, even 
at the cost of my life." And she stood up, 
looking very determined. 

"Children, children," protested the pro- 
fessor, "go to bed — ^you bother me." 

Then I turned deliberately to Miss Hol-» 
xoyd. 

" Good-night, Daisy," I said. 

*' Good-night, Dick," she said, very gently. 



The week passed quickly for me, leaving 
but few definite impressions. As I look back 
to it now I can see the long stretch of beach 
burning in the fierce sunlight, thq endless 



368 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

meadows, with the glimmer of water in the dis- 
tance, the dunes, the twisted cedars, the leagues 
of scintillating ocean, rocking, rocking, always 
rocking. In the starlit nights the curlew came 
in from the sand-bars by twos and threes; I 
could hear their faint call as I lay in bed think- 
ing. All day long the little ring-necks whistled 
from the shore. The plover answered them 
from distant lonely inland pools. The great 
white gulls drifted like feathers upon the sea. 

One morning, toward the end of the week, 
I, strolling along the dunes, came upon Frisby. 
He was bill-posting. I caught him red-handed. 

** This,*' said I, " must stop. Do you under- 
stand, Mr. Frisby? '' 

He stepped back from his work, laying his 
head on one side, considering first me, then 
the bill that he had pasted on one of our big 
boilers. 

"Don't Uke the colour?'* he asked. "It 
goes well on them boilers.'' 

"Colour! No, I don't like the colour 
either. Can't you understand that there are 
some people in the world who object to seeing 
patent-medicine advertisements scattered over a 
landscape? " 

" Hey? " he said perplexed. 

"Will you kindly remove that advertise- 
ment?" I persisted. 

"Too late," said Frisby; "it's sot." 

I was too disgusted to speak, but my dis- 



A MATTEB OF INTEEEST. 269 

gust turned to anger when I perceived that, as 
far as the eye could reach, our boilers, lying 
from three to four hundred feet apart, were 
ablaze with yellow and red posters, extolUng 
the " Eureka Liver Pill Company." 

*^It donH cost *em nothinV' said Frisby 
cheerfully; " I done it fur the fun of it. Purty, 
ain't it? '' 

"They are Professor Hoboyd's boilers,^' I 
said, subduing a desire to beat Frisby with my 
telescope. ** Wait until Miss Holroyd sees thj^ 
work.'* 

"Don't she like yeller and red?" he de- 
manded anxiously. 

"You'll find out," said I. 

Frisby gaped at his handiwork and then at 
his yellow dog. After a moment he mechan- 
ically spat on a clamshell and requested Davy 
to "sic "it. 

"Can't you comprehend that you have 
ruined our pleasure in the landscape?" I asked 
more mildly. 

**I've got some green bills," said Frisby; 
" I kin stick 'em over the yeller ones ^' 

"Confound it!" said I, "it isn't the col- 
our!" 

"Then," observed Frisby, "you don't like 
them pills. I've got some bills of the ' Crop- 
per Bicycle,' and a few of ' Bagley, the Gents* 
Tailor ''' 

"Frisby," said I, "use them all— paste the 



270 'A'HE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

whole collection over your dog and yourself — 
then walk off the cliff/' 

He sullenly unfolded a green poster, 
swabbed the boiler with paste, laid the upper 
section of the bill upon it, and plastered the 
whole bill down with a thwack of his brush. 
As I walked away I heard him muttering. 

Next day Daisy was so horrified that I prom- 
ised to give Frisby an ultimatum. I found 
him with Freda, gazing sentimentally at his 
york, and I sent him back to the shop in a 
hurry, telling Freda at the same time that she 
could spend her leisure in providing Mr. Frisby 
with sand, soap, and a scrubbing brush. Then 
I walked on to my post of observation. 

I watched until sunset. Daisy came with 
her father to hear my report, but there was 
nothing to tell, and we three walked slowly 
back to the house. 

In the evenings the professor worked on 
his volumes, the click of his type-writer sound- 
ing faintly behind his closed door. Daisy and 
I played chess sometimes; sometimes we played 
hearts. I don't remember that we ever finished 
a game of either — ^we talked too much. 

Our discussions covered every topic of in- 
terest: we argued upon politics; we skimmed 
over literature and music; we settled interna- 
tional differences; we spoke vaguely of human 
brotherhood. I say we slighted no subject of 
interest — ^I am wrong; we never spoke of love. 



A MATTEK OF INTEREST. 271 

Now, love is a matter of interest to ten 
people out of ten. Why it was that it did not 
appear to interest us is as interesting a ques- 
tion as love itself. We were young, alert, en- 
thusiastic, inquiring. We eagerly absorbed 
theories concerning any curious phenomena in 
Nature, as intellectual cocktails to stimulate 
discussion. And yet we did not discuss love. 
I do not say that we avoided it. No; the sub- 
ject was too completely ignored for even that. 
And yet we found it very difficult to pass an 
hour separated. The professor noticed this, 
and laughed at us. We were not even embar- 
rassed. 

Sunday passed in pious contemplation of 
the ocean. Daisy read a little in her prayer- 
book, and the professor threw a cloth over his 
typewriter and strolled up and down the sands. 
He may have been lost in devout abstraction; 
he may have been looking for footprints. As 
for me, my mind was very serene, and I was 
more than happy. Daisy read to me a little 
for my souFs sake, and the professor came up 
and said something cheerful. He also examined 
the magazine of my Winchester. 

That night, too, Daisy took her guitar to 
the sands and sang one or two Armenian hymns. 
Unlike us, the Armenians do not take their 
pleasures sadly. One of their pleasures is evi- 
dently religion. 

The big moon came up over the dunes and 



272 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

stared at the sea until the surface of every wave 
trembled with radiance. A sudden stillness 
fell across the world; the wind died out; the 
foam ran noiselessly across the beach; the crick- 
et's rune was stilled. 

I leaned back^ dropping one hand upon 
the sand. It touched another hand^ soft and 
cool. 

After a while the other hand moved slightly, 
and I found that my own had closed above it. 
Presently one finger stirred a little— only a 
little — ^f or our fingers were interlocked. 

On the shore the foam-froth bubbled and 
winked and glimmered in the moonlight. A 
star fell from the zenith, showering the night 
with incandescent dust. 

If our fingers lay interlaced beside us, her 
eyes were calm and serene as always, wide open, 
fixed upon the depths of a dark sky. And 
when her father rose and spoke to us, she did 
not withdraw her hand. 

'* Is it late? '* she asked dreamily. 

"It is midnight, little daughter.'* 

I stood up, still holding her hand, and aided 
her to rise. And when, at the door, I said 
good-night, she turned and looked at me for 
a little while in silence, then passed into 
her room slowly, with head still turned toward 
me. 

All night long I dreamed of her; and when 
the east whitened, I sprang up, the thunder of 



A MATTEB OP INTEBEST. 278 

the ocean in my ears^ the strong sea wind blow- 
ing into the open window. 

"She is asleep/' I thought, and I leaned 
from the window and peered out into the 
east. 

The sea called to me, tossing its thousand 
arms; the soaring gulls, dipping, rising, wheel- 
ing above the sand-bar, screamed and clamoured 
for a playmate. I slipped into my bathing suit, 
dropped from the window upon the soft sand, 
and in a moment had plimged head foremost 
into the surf, swimming beneath the waves 
toward the open sea. 

Under the tossing ocean the voice of the 
waters was in my ears — ^a low, sweet voice, in- 
timate, mysterious. Through singing foam and 
broad, green, glassy depths, by whispering sandy 
channels atrail with seaweed, and on, on, out 
into the vague, cool sea, I sped, rising to the 
top, sinking, gliding. Then at last I flung 
myself out of water, hands raised, and the clam- 
our of the gxdls filled my ears. 
.'^ As I lay, breathing fast, drifting on the sea, 
far out beyond the gulls I saw a flash of white, 
and an arm was lifted, signalling me. 

"Daisy!'' I called. 

A clear hail came across the water, distinct 
on the sea wind, and at the same instant we 
raised our hands and moved toward each 
other. 

How we laughed as we met in the seal The 



274 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

white dawn came up out of the depths, the 
zenith turned to rose and ashes. 

And with the dawn came the wind — ^a great 
sea wind, fresh, aromatic, that hurled our voices 
back into our throats and lifted the sheeted 
spray above our heads. Every wave, crowned 
with mist, caught us in a cool embrace, cradled 
us, and slipped away, only to leave us to another 
wave, higher, stronger, crested with opalescent 
glory, breathing incense. 

We turned together up the coast, swim- 
ming lightly side by side, but our words were 
caught up by the winds and whirled into the 
sky. 

We looked up at the driving clouds; we 
looked out upon the pallid waste of waters; but 
it was into each other^s eyes we looked, won- 
dering, wistful, questioning the reason of sky 
and sea. And there in each other's eyes we 
read the mystery, and we knew that earth and 
sky and sea were created for us alone. 

Drifting on by distant sands and dunes, her 
white fingers touching mine, we spoke, keying 
our tones to the wind's vast harmony. And we 
spoke of love. 

Gray and wide as the limitless span of the 
sky and the sea, the winds gathered from the 
world's ends to bear us on; but they were not 
familiar winds; for now, along the coast, the 
breakers curled and showed a million fangs, 
and the ocean stirred to its depths, uneasy. 



A MATTEB OP INTEEEST. ^75 

ominotis, and the menace of its murmur drew 
us closer as we moved. 

Where the dull thunder and the tossing 
spray warned us from sunken reefs, we heard 
the harsh challenges of gulls; where the pallid 
surf twisted in yellow coils of spume above the 
bar, the singing sands murmured of treachery 
and secrets of lost souls agasp in the throes of 
silent undertows. 

But there was a little stretch of beach glim- 
mering through the mountains of water, and 
toward this we turned, side by side. Around 
us the water grew warmer; the breath of the 
following waves moistened our cheeks; the 
water itself grew gray and strange about us. 

"We have come too far,'* I said; but she 
only answered: " Paster, faster! I am afraid! " 
The water was almost hot now; its aromatic 
odour filled our lungs. 

"The Gulf loop!'* I muttered. "Daisy, 
shall I help you? *' 

"No. Swim— close by me! Oh-h! 
Dick '' 

Her startled cry was echoed by another — a 
shrill scream, imutterably horrible — and a great 
bird flapped from the beach, splashing and beat- 
ing, its pinions across the water with a thun- 
dering noise. 

Out across the waves it blundered, rising 
little by little from the water, and now, to my 
horror, I saw another monstrous bird swing- 



276 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

ing in the air above it^ squeaUng as it turned 
on its vast wings. Before I could speak we 
touched the beach^ and I half lifted her to the 
shore. 

"Quick!" I repeated. "We must not 
wait." 

Her eyes were dark with fear, but she rested 
a hand on my shoulder, and we crept up among 
the dune grasses and sank down by the point of 
sand where the rough shelter stood, surrounded 
by the iron-ringed piles. 

She lay there, breathing fast and deep, 
dripping with spray. I had no power of speech 
left, but when I rose wearily to my knees and 
looked out upon the water my blood ran cold. 
Above the ocean, on the breast of the roaring 
wind, three enormous birds sailed, turning and 
wheeling among each other; and below, drift- 
ing with the gray stream of the Gulf loop, a 
colossal bulk lay half submerged — a gigantic 
lizard, floating belly upward. 

Then Daisy crept kneeling to my side and 
touched me, trembling from head to foot. 

" I know," I muttered. " I must run back 
for the rifle." 

"And — ^and leave me?" 

I took her by the hand, and we dragged 
ourselves through the wire grass to the open 
end of a boiler lying in the sand. 

She crept in on her hands and knees, and 
called to me to follow. 



A MATTEB OP INTBBEST. 277 

** You are safe now/' I cried. ** I must go 
back for the rifle/' 

" The birds may — ^may attack you/' 

** If they do I can get into one of the other 
boilers/' I said. "Daisy, you must not ven- 
ture out until I come back. You won't, will 
you?" 

" No-o," she whispered doubtfully. 

" Then— good-by." 

" 6ood-by/' she answered, but her voice was 
very small and still. 

"Good-by," I said again. I was kneeling 
at the mouth of the big iron tunnel; it was 
dark inside and I could not see her, but, before 
I was conscious of it, her arms were around 
my neck and we had kissed each other. 

I don't remember how I went away. When 
I came to my proper senses I was swimming 
along the coast at full speed, and over my head 
wheeled one of the birds, screaming at every 
turn. 

The intoxication of that innocent embrace, 
the close impress of her arms aroimd my neck, 
gave me a strength and recklessness that nei- 
ther fear nor fatigue could subdue. The bird 
above me did not even frighten me; I watched 
it over my shoulder, swimming strongly, with 
the tide now aiding me, now stemming my 
course; but I saw the shore passing quickly 
and my strength increased, and I shouted when 
I came in sight of the house^ and scrambled up 



2Y8 THE MYSTEBY OP CHOICE. 

on the sand; d]:ippmg and excited. There was 
nobody in sights and I gave a last glance np 
into the air where the bird wheeled, still 
screeching, and hastened into the house. Freda 
stared at me in amazement as I seized the rifle 
and shouted for the professor. 

"He has just gone to town, with Captain 
McPeek in his wagon,^^ stammered Freda. 

" What! ^' I cried. " Does he know where 
his daughter is?*' 

"Miss Holroyd is asleep — ^not?*' gasped 
Freda. 

" Where's Frisby? '' I cried impatiently. 

" Yimmie? '' quavered Freda. 

"Yes, Jimmie; isn't there anybody here? 
Good heavens! where's that man in the shop? " 

"He also iss gone," said Freda, shedding 
tears, "to buy papier-mach6. Yimmie, he iss 
gone to post bills." 

I waited to hear no more, but swung my 
rifle over my shoulder, and, hanging the car- 
tridge belt across my chest, hurried out and up 
the beach. The bird was not in sight. 

I had been running for perhaps a minute 
when, far up on the dunes, I saw a yellow dog 
rush madly through a clump of sweet bay, and 
at the same moment a bird soared past, rose, 
and hung hovering just above the thicket. Sud- 
denly the bird swooped; there was a shriek and 
a yelp from the cur, but the bird gripped it in 
one claw and beat its wings upon the sand, striv- 



A MATTEB OP INTEREST. 279 

ing to rise. Then I saw Frisby-r-paste, bucket, 
and brush raised — ^fall upon the bird, yelling 
lustily. The fierce creature relaxed its talons, 
and the dog rushed on, squeaking with terror. 
The bird turned on Frisby and sent him sprawl- 
ing on his face, a sticky mass of paste and sand. 
But this did not end the stniggle. The bird, 
croaking wildly, flew at the prostrate billposter, 
and the sand whirled into a pillar above its 
terrible wings. Scarcely knowing what I was 
about, I raised my rifle and fired twice. A 
horrid scream echoed each shot, and the bird 
rose heavily in a shower of sand; but two bul- 
lets were embedded in that mass of foul 
feathers, and I saw the wires and scarlet tape 
uncoiling on the sand at my feet. In an in- 
stant I seized them and passed the ends around 
a cedar tree, hooking the clasps tight. Then 
I cast one swift glance upward, where the bird 
wheeled screeching, anchored like a kite to the 
pallium wires; and I hurried on across the 
dunes, the shells cutting my feet, and the bushes 
tearing my wet swimming suit, until I dripped 
with blood from shoulder to ankle. Out in 
the ocean the carcass of the Thermosaurus 
floated, claws outspread, belly glistening in the 
gray light, and over him circled two birds. As 
I reached the shelter I knelt and fired into the 
mass of scales, and at my first shot a horrible 
thing occurred: the lizardlike head writhed, 
the slitted yellow eyes sliding open from the 
19 



280 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

film that covered them. A shudder passed 
across the undulating body, the great scaled 
belly heaved, and one leg feebly clawed at the 
air. 

The thing was still alive I 

Crushing back the horror that almost para- 
lyzed my hands, I planted shot after shot into 
the quivering reptile, while it writhed and 
clawed, striving to turn over and dive; and at 
each shot the black blood spurted in long, slim 
jets across the water. And now Daisy was at 
my side, pale and determined, swiftly clasping 
each tape-marked wire to the iron rings in the 
circle aroimd us. Twice I filled the magazine 
from my belt, and twice I poured streams of 
steel-tipped bullets into the scaled mass, twist- 
ing and shuddering on the sea. Suddenly the 
birds steered toward us. I felt the wind from 
their vast wings. I saw the feathers erect, vi- 
brating. I saw the spread claws outstretched, 
and I struck furiously at them, crying to Daisy 
to run into the iron shelter. Backinp, swinging 
my clubbed rifle, I retreated, but I tripped 
across one of the taut pallium wires, and in an 
instant the hideous birds were on me, and the 
bone in my forearm snapped like a pipestem at 
a blow from their wings. Twice I struggled 
to my knees, blinded with blood, confused, al- 
most fainting; then I fell again, rolling into 
the mouth of the iron boiler. 



A MATTEB OP INTEREST. 281 

When I struggled back to consciousness 
Daisy knelt silently beside me, while Captain 
McPeek and Professor Holroyd bound up my 
shattered arm, talking excitedly. The pain 
made me faint and dizzy. I tried to speak and 
could not. At last they got me to my feet and 
into the wagon, and Daisy came, too, and 
crouched beside me, wrapped in oilskins to her 
eyes. Fatigue, lack of food, and excitement 
had combined with wounds and broken bones 
to extinguish the last atom of strength in my 
body; but my mind was clear enough to un- 
derstand that the trouble was over and the 
Thermosaurus safe. 

I heard McPeek say that one of the birds 
that I had anchored to a cedar tree had torn 
loose from the bullets and winged its way 
heavily out to sea. The professor answered: 
** Yes, the ekaf-bird; the others were ool-ylliks. 
I'd have given my right arm to have secured 
them.'' Then for a time I heard no more; but 
the jolting of the wagon over the dunes roused 
me to keenest pain, and I held out my right 
hand to Daisy. She clasped it in both of hers, 
and kissed it again and again. 

There is little more to add, I think. Pro- 
fessor Bruce Stoddard has edited this story 
carefully. His own scientific pamphlet will be 
published soon, to be followed by Professor Hol- 
royd's sixteen volumes. In a few days the 



282 THE MYSTERY OP CHOICE. 

fltuflfed and mounted Thermosanrus will be 
placed on free public exhibition in the arena 
of Madison Square Garden, the only building 
in the city large enough to contain the body of 
this immense winged reptile. 

When my arm came out of splints, Daisy 
and I — — But really that has nothing to do 
with a detailed scientific description of the 
Thermosaurus, which, I think, I shall add as 
an appendix to the book. If you do not find 
it there it will be because Daisy and I have very 
little time to write about Thermosaurians. 

But what I really want to tell you about is 
the extraordinary adventures of Captain Mc- 
Peek and Frisby — ^how they produced a speci- 
men of Samia Cynthia that dwarfed a hundred 
of Attacus Atlas, and how the American line 
steamer St. Louis fouled the thing with her 
screw. 

The more I think of it the more determined 
I am to tell it to you. It will be difficult to 
prevent me. And that is not fiction either. 



ENVOI. 



ENVOI. 



Wh^n 8?Mdow8pa8s across the grass 

And April breezes stir the sedge. 

Along the brimming rivet^s edge 
I trail my line for silver trout. 

And smoke, and dream of you, my lass. 
And wonder why we two fell out. 
And how the deuce it came about. 

n. 

When swaUows sheer the meadovHnere 
And thickets thrill with thrushes^ hymns, 
Al^mg the mill-pond's reedy rims 

I trail my line for shining dace; 
But how can finny fishes cheer 

A fellow, if he find no grace 

In your sweet eyes and your dear face f 

m. 

Let thrushes wing their way and sing 

Where cresses freshen pebbled nooks; 

By silent rills and singing brooks 
I pass my way alone, aias I 

With your dear name the woodlands ring — 
Your name is murmured by the grass, 
By earth, by air, ail-where I pass. 



286 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

IV. 

The painted bream may swim the stream — 
ril east no litie to-day , pardi ! 

In vadn the river-ripples gleam, 
In vain the thrushes* minstrelsy. 

Vain is the wind that whispers, **Lo ! 

Thy fish are waiting— Angler, go I ** 



Will you forgive if I forgive f 
Life is too sctd, I think, to live 
Alone, and dream and smoke and fish; 
ril say '^Forgive " first-^f you wish f 

n. 

For at that word, tJ^ Sorcery 
Of Love shall change the earth a/nd shy 
To Paradise, with cherubim 
Instead of birds on every limb, 

FIT. 

Rivers shall sing our rhapsody; 
The vaulted forest, tree by tree. 
High hung with tapestry, shaill glow 
With golden pillars all arrow, 

vm. 

And dotffn the gilded forest aisle 
Shy throngs of violets shall smile 
And kiss your feet from tree to tree 
While blue-beUs droop in courtesy, 

IX, 

And if the sun incarnadine 

The clouds— green leaves shall be your screen; 



ENVOI. 287 

Aitd if the elouda tinth jealousy 
Should weep — we*ll beg of some kind tree 
A moments Tiospitality, 

X. 

Good cheer is hersj if you incline ; 
Moss-hidden springs shaXl bubble wine 
While squirrels chuckle, rank on rank. 
And strawberries from every bank 
Shall blush to see how deep we drank, 

XT. 

Winds of the West shall cool our eyes 
While every woodland creature tries 
His voice a little, so that he 
May know his notes more perfectly 
When crickets start the symphony, 

xn. 

Through hazel glade and scented dell 
YThere brooklets ring a tinkling bell. 
The forest orchestra shall swell. 
Until the sun-soaked grasses ring 
With crickets strumming string on string. 

xm. 

Then, with your white hand daintily 
Scarce touching mine, we*ll leave our tree 
And ramble slowly toward tJie West 
WTiere our high castle*s flctming crest, 
Towering behind the setting sun. 
Flings out its banners, one by one. 
Signals of fire, that day is done. 



288 THE MYSTERY OF CHOICE. 

XIV, 

Deep in tT^t palace we sTuUlfind 

How blind we are^ how blind t how blind I 

And how he^ll laugh, who holds the key 

To the great portaVa mystery I 

And Tbow hie joyous laugh will ring 

When you and I shall bid him fling 

The gates ajar for you and me I 

XT. 

Let shadows flee athwart the lea 

When dark December strips the hedge 

Along the icy river's edge; 

Vet, if you will forgive me, Itiss, 

The world shall bloom like spring to me, 
Snow turn to dew upon the grass 
And fagots blossom where you pass, 

XVL 

Swallows shall sheer the frozen mere. 
Dead reeds along the mill-pond^ s rims 
Shall thrill with summer-thrushes^ hymns, 

While summer breezes blow apace. 
If you will but forgive me, dear, 
And let me find a momenfs grace, 
In your sweet eyes and your dear face, 

R. W. C. 



THE END. 



D. APPLETON ft CO.*S PUBLICATIONS. 

GILBERT PARKER'S BEST BOOKS. 

HTHE SEA TS OF THE MIGHTY, Being the Mem- 
-^ oirs of Captain Robert Moray, soaactime an Officer in the 

Virginia Regiment, and afterwards of Amherst's Regiment 

i2mo. Cloth) illustrated, $i.5a 

" Another historical romance of the viridness and intensity of ' The 
Seau of the Mighty' has never come from the pen of an American. Mr. 
Parker's latest work may, withoat hesitation, he set down as the best he has 
done. From the first chapter to the last word interest in the book never 
wanes ; one finds it difficult to interrupt the narrative with breaUiing space. 
It whiris with excitement and strange adventure. . . . All of the scenes do 
homage to the genius (^ Mr. Parker, and make ' The Seats of the Mighty ' 
one of the bo<^ of die ytBX.**—Ckicago Record, 

" Mr. Gilbert Paricer is to be congratulated (m the excellence of his 
latest story, *The Seats of the Mighty/ and his readers are to be con- 
gratulated on the direction which his talents have taken therein. ... It is 
so good that we do not stm to think of its literature and the pcncmality of 
DoTtaireis a masterpiece of creative art."— iVirw York Ma^ and Express, 

n^E TRAIL OF THE SWORD. A Novel. i2mo. 
^ Paper, 50 cents ; cloth, $i.oa 

" Mr. Parker here adds to a reputation already wide, and anew demon- 
strates lus power of pictorial portrayal and of strong dramatic situation and 
eaaax:* —Philadelphia BulleUn, 

'* The tale holds the reader's interest from first to last, for it is full of 
fire and spirit, abounding in incident and mariced by good character-draw- 
ing."— /ViOlr^wr^ Times, 

'TTHE TRESPASSER. i2mo. Paper, 50 cents ; cloth, 
"^ $1.00. 

" Interest, pith, force, and charm — ^Mr. Parker's new story possesses all 
diese qualities. . . . Almost bare of sjrnthetical decorarion, his paragraphs 
are stirring because they are real. We read at times — as we have read the 
great masters of romance— breathlessly."— 7"^** Critic. 

** Gilbert Parker writes a strong novel, but thus fitr thu is his master- 
piece. ... It is one of the great noveb of the ytxi." •^Boston Adver» 
tuer. 

HTHE TRANSLATION OF A SAVAGE, i6mo. 
-* Flexible doth, 75 cents. 

*' A book which no one will be satisfied to put down until the end has 
been mauer of certainty and assurance." — Tht Nation, 

**A story of remarkable interest, originality, and ingenuity of construc- 
tion."— ^M/tf*» I/cme youmoL 



New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 7a Fifth Avenue. 



D. APPLBTON ft CO.*8 PUBLICATIONS. 

MISS F. F. MONTRfeOR'S BOOKS. 
PALSE COIN OR TRUE? i6ino. Cloth, I1.25. 

"Oneofthefewtraenordtoftheday. . . . It is powerful, and touched 
with a delicate insight and strong impressions of life and duuacter. . . . 
The author's theme is original, her treatment artistic, and due book is re- 
markable for iu unflagging uAitmax!* ~-PhUad4lphia Record, 

** The tale never flag;s in interest, and once taken up wiU not be laid 
down until the last page is 6auhied"— Boston Budget, 

"A well- written novel, with well>depicted characters and well-chosea 
scenes."— C^a^ News, 

" A sweet, tender, pure, and lovely %Macf** -^Buffalo Commercial, 

HTHE ONE WHO LOOKED ON. i6mo. Cloth, 

^ $1.35. 

" A tale quite unusual, entirely unlike any other, full of a strange power 
and realism, and touched with a fine hyxaos,— London World, 

" One of the most remarlcable and powerful of die yearns contributions, 
worthy to stand with Ian Mmdaxen*t."—BntisA Weekly, 

'* One of the rare hookt wluch can be read widi great pleasure and rec- 
onmiended without reservation. It is fresh, pure, sweet, sliuI padietic, widi 
a pathos which is perfecdy wholesome."— JSV. /*anl Globe, 

" The story is an btensely human one, and it is delightfully told. . . . The 
author shows a marvelous keenness in character analjrsis, and a mariced 
ingenuity in the development of her %\aty**— Boston Advertiser, 

TNTO THE HIGHWA YS AND HEDGES, i2mo. 
-^ Paper, 50 cents ; cloth, $1.00. 

"A touch of idealism, of nobility of thought and purpose, mingled widi 
an air of reality and well-chosen expresnon, are the most notable features of 
a book that has not the ordinary defects of such qualities. With all its ele- 
vation of utterance and spirituality of oudook and insight it ia wonderfully 
free from overstrained or exaggerated matter, and it has glimpses of hu- 
mor. Most of the characters are vivid, yet there are restraint and sobriety 
in their treatment, and almost all are cazeftdly and consistendy evolved."— 
London Athenaum, 

'•* ' Into the Highwavs and Hedges ' is a book not of inromise only, but 
It is original, powoful, artisdc, humorous. Itplacei 



of high achievement It is original, powoful, artisdc, humorous. 

the author at a bound in the rank of those artists to whom we look (or the 
skillful presentation of strong personal impressions of life and character."— 
London Daily News, 

"The pure idealism of * Into die Highways and Hedges* does much to 
redeem modem ficdon firom die reproach it has brought upon itself. . . . The 
story is original, and told with great refinement."— T'AiZii. Public Ledger, 



New York: D. APPLETON & CO., 7a Fifth Avenue. 



D. APPLBTON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

STEPHEN CRANE'S BOOKS. 

q^HE THIRD VIOLET, i2mo. Cloth, $i.oo. 

Mr. Crane's new novel is a fiesh and delightful study of artist life 
in the city and the country. The theme is workeid out w.ith the author's 
characteristic originality and force, and with much natural humor. In sub- 
ject the book is altogether difierent from any of iu predecessors, and Ute 
author's maiked success proves his breadth and the versatihty of his great 
talent. 

HTHE LITTLE REGIMENT, and Other Episodes of 
-^ the American Civil War, lamo. Cloth, $i.oo. 



M' 



"In 'The Litde Reeiment' we have again studies of the volunteers 
waiting impatiently to fight and fighting, and the impression of the contest 
as a private soldier hears, sees^ and feek it is really wonderful. The reader 
has no privileges. He must, it seems, take his i^ce in the ranks, and stand 
in die mud, wade in the river, fight, yell, swear, and sweat with the men. 
He has some sort of feeling, when it is all over, that he has been doing just 
these things. This sort of writing needs no praise. It will make its way to 
the hearu of men without praise.*^— A^<rw York Timet, 

"Told with a verve that brings a whiff (^ burning powder to one's nos- 
trils. ... In some way he blazons the scene before our eyes, and makes us 
feel the very impetus of bloody ynx.'*^Chicago Evening Poet, 

r AGGIE: A GIRL OF THE STREETS. i2mo. 
Cloth, 75 cents. 

" By writing ' Maggie ' Mr. Crane has made for himself a permanent 
place in literature. . . . Zola himsdf scarcely has surpassed its tremendous 
portrayal of throbbmg, bmthing, moving life."— AVw York Mail and 
Expreee, 

" Mr. Crane's story should be read for the fidelity with which it portrays 
a life that is potent on this island, along with the best of us. It is a powerful 
portrayal, uid, if somber and repellent, none the less true, none the less 
nreighted with appeal to those »dio are able to assist in righting wrongs." — 
New York Timet, 

qTHE RED BADGE OF COURAGE. An Episode of 
-*• the American Civil War, i2mo. Cloth, $i.oo. 

"Never before have we had the seamy side of glorious war so well de- 
picted. . . . The action of the %xarr throughout is splendid, and all aglow 
with color, movement, and vim. The style is as keen and bright as a sword- 
blade, ana a Kiplmg has done nothing better in this ^<t,**—Chkago Even^ 
ing Pott. 

" There is nothing in American fiction to compare with it . . . Mr. 
Crane has added to American Uterature something that has never been done 
before, and that is, in its own peculiar way, inimitable." — Botton Beacon. 

" A truer '.and completer picture of war than either Tolstoy or Zola." — 
Zumdon New Review. 



D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. 



D. APPLBTON ft CO.*8 PUBLICATIONS. 



5IR MARK, A Tale of the First Capital. By Anna 
Robeson Brown. i6mo. Qoth, 75 cents. 
" One could hardly imagine a more channins short historical tale. . • .• 
It is almost classic in its simplicity and ^ffoXy.— Baltimore Aews. 

n^ffE FOLLY OF EUSTACE, By R. S. Hichens. 
1 author of " An Imaginative Man," ** The Green Carnation/' 
etc. i6mo. Cloth, 75 cents. 
" In each of these stories the author of *Thc Green Carnation' shows 
his hand without intendinR to. There is the same cynicism, the same epi- 
grammatic wit. Among the new English story writers there are none more 
brilliant than Mr. Hichens."— C^a^<9 Tributu, 

QLEEPING FIRES. By George Gissing, author of 
•3 ♦* In the Year of Jubilee," " Eve's Ransom," etc i6mo. 
Cloth, 75 cents. 
" Intense, extremely weU told, and fiiU of disc ri minating study of life 
and fitiaxwcxiu,**— Buffalo Cffmitmvial, 

(^TON^EPASTURES, By Eleanor Stuart. i6ma 
O Cloth, 75 cents. 

«*This is a strong bit of good literary workmanship.**— i*iWB«*4^*ai 
Public Ledgtr, 

r^OURTSfflP BY COMMAND. By M. M. Blake. 

L^ i6mo. Cloth, 75 cents. 

'* A bright, moving study of an unusually interesting period in &e life 
6[ Napoleon, . . . delidously told; the characters are clearly, strongly, 
and very delicately modeled, and the touches of color most artisticaliy 
done."— AVw Vork Commercial AdoerUstr, 

rHE WATTER'S MOU\ By Bram Stoker. 
i6mo. Cloth, 75 cents. 
" Here is a tale to stir the most sluggish nature. ... It is like standing 
on the deck of a wave-tossed ship; jrou feel the soul of die storm go into 
your blood."— iVirw York Home yourmU. 

Jijf ASTER AND MAN. By Count Lfo Tolstoy. 

IVl With an Introduction by W. D. Howblls. i6ido. 

Cloth, 75 cents. 

" Reveals a wonderful knowledge of the workings of the human iqmd, 

and it tells a tale that not only stirs the emotions, but gives us a better in> 

sight into our own hearu." — Sow Francisco A rgorutut 

HE ZEfT-GEIST. By L. Dougall, author of " The 

Mermaid," ** Beggars All," etc i6mo. Cloth, 75 cents. 
Powerful in conception, treatment, and influence."— ^bf/^w Globe. 



T 



New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 7a Fifth Avenue, 



D. APPLBTON ft CO.*8 PUBLICATIONS. 

RUDYARD KIPUNG»S NEW BOOK. 

n^HE SEVEN SEAS. A new volume of poems by 
•^ RuDYARD KIPLINO, author of " Many Inventions/* ** Bar- 
rack-Room Ballads," etc i2mo. Cloth, $1.50 ; half calf, 
$3.00; morocco, $5.00. 

'* The spirit and method of Kipling's fresh and virile song hare taken 
the English reading worid. . . . When we turn to the larger pwtion of 
' The Seven Seas/ how imaginative it is, how impassioned, now superbly 
rhythmic and sonorous! . . . The ring and diction of this verse add new 
elements to our song. . . . The true laureate of Greater Britain." — B. C 
Stedmatty in tht Book Bujtr. 

" The most origmal poet who has appeared in his generation. . . . His 
is the lustiest voice now lifted in the world, the clearest, the bravest, with 
the fewest &lse notes in it. ... I do not see why, in reading his book, 
we should not put ourselves in the presence ofa. great poet agaui. and con- 
sent to put off our mourning for the high ones lately dead. — fK. V, 
HowelU. 

"The new poems of Mr. Rudyard Kipling have all the spirit and 
swing of their predecessors. Throughout they are instinct with the 
qualities which are essentially his, and which have made, and seem likely 
to keep, for him his position and wide popularity ."^^^^im^Stis Times. 

" He has the very heart of movement, for the lack of which no metrical 
science could atone. He goes far because he can." — London Academy. 

" * The Seven Seas ' is the most remarkable book of verse that Mr. 
Kipling has given us. Here the human sjrmpathy is broader and deeper, 
the patriotism heartier and fuller, the intellectual and spiritual insight 
keener, the command of the literary vehicle more complete and sure, than 
in any previous verse-work by the author. The volume pulses with power 
—.power often rough and reckless in expression, but invariably conveying 
the effect intended. There is scarcely a line which does not testify to the 
strong individuality of the writer." — London Globe, 

** If a man holding this volume in his hands, with all its extravagance 
and its savage realism, is not aware that it is animated through and through 
with indubitable genius — then he must be too much the slave of the con- 
ventional and the ordinary to understand that Poetry metamorphoses her- 
self in man^ diverse forms, and that its one sovereign and mddeasible 
justification is — truth." — London Daily Telegraph. 

'"The Seven Seas' is packed with inspiration, with humor, with 
pathos, and with the old uncK^ualed insight into the mind of ^e raiuc and 
file." — London Daily Chronicle, 

"Mr. Kipling's 'The Seven Seas' is a distinct advance upon his 
characteristic Imes. The surpa<(sing strength, the almost violent originality, 
the gidrious swish and swing of his lines — all are there in increased meas- 
ure. . . . The book is a marvel of originality and genius— « brand-new 
landmark in the history of English letters."— CArVa/v Tribune. 

"In 'The Seven Seas' are displajred all of Kipltntr's prodigious jjifts. 
. . . Whoever reads 'The Seven Seas* will be vexed by the desire to 
read it again. The average charm of the gifts alone is irresistible."— 
Boston yountaL 

New York: D. APPLETON & CO.. 72 Fifth Avenue. 



D. APPLBTON ft CO.*8 PUBLICATIONS. 



Books by Mrs. Evbrard Cotes (Sara Jeannsttb Duncan). 

TITS HONOUR, AND A LADY. lUustrated. i2mo. 
J- 1 Cloth, $1.50. 

" < His Honour, «i#<rlwlj' * is a finished novel, colored with trae local 
dyes and instinct with the Anglo-Indian and pure Indiui spirit, besides a 
perversion by originality of created character and a crisp way of puttine 

qTHE STORY OF SONNY SAHIB. Hlustiated. 
-/ lamo. Cloth, $i.oa 
" As perfect a story of its kind as can be imagined."— C^laai/9 Titnu* 

1/ERNON'S A UNT. With many lUustiations. i2mo. 

y Cloth, $1.35. 

** A most vivid and wtsiistir impression of certain phases of life in 
India, and no one can read her vivacious chronicle without indidging ia 
many a hearty laugh."— .Am/ms Btacon, 



A 



DAUGHTER OF TO-DAY. A Novd. i2mo. 
Cloth, $i.5a 

'* This novel is a strong and serious fnece of work; one of a kind that 
is gettbg too rare in these days c^ univenal crankiness."— ^tfil9» Courier. 



A SOCIAL DEPARTURE: How Orthodocin and I 
XM. Went Round the World by Ourselves. With iii Illustra- 
tions by F. H. TowNSEND. i2mo. Paper, 75 cents; 
cloth, $1.75- 
" A brighter, merrier, more entirely diarming book would be, indeed, 
diflficult to find."— 5/. Louis Republic, 



A' 



IN AMERICAN GIRL IN LONDON. With 80 
Illustrations by F. H. Townsend. lamo. Paper, 75 
cents ; doth, $1.50. 
"So sprightly a book as this, on life in London as observed by an 
American, has never before been wnttiea.*'^PAiladelpAut BuUeOm, 



T'HE SIMPLE ADVENTURES OF A MEAf^ 
1 SAHIB. With 37 Illustrations by F. H. Townsenb. 
x2mo. Cloth, $1.50. 
" It is like traveling without leaving one's annchaur to read it Misa 
Piincan has the descriptive and narrative gift in large measure, and she 
brings vividly before us the street scenes, the interiors, the bewuderingly 
queer natives, the gayeties of &e English cok>ny."— PAiZs. Telegraph. 



New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 72 Fifth Avenue. 



DTT^ r^ 



14 DAY USE 

RSTURN TO DESK FROM WHICH BORKOWBD 

LOAN DEPT. 

This book is due on the last date stamped below» of 

on the date to which renewed. 

Renewed books are subject to immediate recall. 



^^SEMOA 


» 


lH REC^D UO 




SEP U 19G0 






1 


















1 




1 




1 



















YA 08722 



-- >> 




500t>V3 



UNIVERSITY OF CAUFORNU LIBRARY 




